For 20 minutes, Villanova looked ordinary, vulnerable, may be even a little scared.
 
 The Wildcats finished like champions.
 
 Donte DiVincenzo scored 21 points and the NCAA Tournament's top seed shook off a shocking start and stumbled forward in the East region Thursday night with a 76-56 victory over No. 16 seed Mount St. Mary's.
 
 Leading by just one at halftime, the Wildcats (32-3) opened the second half with a 21-6 run and took their first step toward defending their championship. Villanova is trying to be the first back-to-back titlist since Florida in 2007, and the Wildcats will have to play better to make history.
 
  Villanova coach Jay Wright said. 
 
 Since the NCAA went to seeding in 1985, No. 1 seeds are 130-0 against No. 16s. The historic upset remains elusive, but for a while it looked like it could happen inside KeyBank Center.
 
 Freshman Miles Wilson scored 22 points as the Mountaineers (20-16), who edged New Orleans in a First Four matchup on Tuesday, gave the defending champions all they could handle in the first half.
 
  Mount St. Mary's Elijah Long said.
 
 But the Big East champions, who entered this tourney with more wins than any past champion, regrouped at halftime and reserved a date with Wisconsin, which beat Virginia Tech 84-74, in the second round on Saturday.
 
 It wasn't easy. It's not supposed to be.
 
  Wright said. 
 
 Jalen Brunson scored 14 points and Mikal Bridges had 13 for the Wildcats.
 
 Villanova not only survived a tough test from the Mountaineers but a horrendous shooting night by senior Kris Jenkins. The hero of last year's NCAA title game, when his 3-pointer at the horn defeated North Carolina, Jenkins missed his first 10 shots and finished just 2 of 13.
 
  Wright said. "
 
 The Mount St. Mary's players wear warmups with  written on the back, and they caused quite a commotion in the early going.
 
 Showing no fear against a team the smart-money guys in Las Vegas said would beat them by 25, the Mountaineers jumped to a 10-2 lead against the Wildcats, who missed their first eight shots, committed two turnovers and had three shots blocked in the opening 5 minutes.
 
  Wright said. 
 
 Villanova's players looked nervous and played that way, and when Long threaded a no-look pass to Chris Wray for an easy basket to put the Mountaineers ahead 23-20, two seminarians -- one of them clutching Rosary beads -- from the tiny school in Emmitsburg, Maryland, high-fived in the stands.
 
 Villanova, though, recovered and took its first lead at 26-25 when Eric Paschall powered home a dunk with 2:33 left in the half.
 
 The Mountaineers left the court at halftime down only 30-29 and full of confidence.
 
 It didn't' last.
 
 Villanova senior Josh Hart, who sat more than 8 minutes in the first half with two fouls, opened the second half with a layup and DiVincenzo, who added 13 rebounds, hit a 3 to cap a 13-2 burst that knocked the air out of Mount St. Mary's.
 
 Before long, the Wildcats were having their way, and except for DiVincenzo missing two breakaway dunks, Villanova showed why many believe they can win it all again.
 
 UNDER WRAPS
 
 Mount St. Mary's Junior Robinson, the dazzling 5-foot-5 point guard, was held to seven points on 3-of-9 shooting. He scored 23 in the First Four win at Dayton.
 
 OFF THE MARK
 
 Jenkins has been struggling with his shot for some time. He's 28 for 83 in his past seven games.
 
 Wright, though, isn't concerned because while Jenkins has lost his touch, his confidence remains.
 
  Wright said. 
 
  
 
 Villanova: The Wildcats showed why they're champions by stepping up when it counted, shooting 63 percent in the second half. DiVincenzo has emerged as a major contributor of late, something Nova has needed with Jenkins struggling.
 
 Mount St. Mary's: With all five starters coming back, the Mountaineers should be in position to get back in the NCAA field.
 
  coach Jamion Christian said. 
 
 In a tournament made famous by the notion that anything can happen, one thing still has not: In 129 tries, no 16 seed has ever beaten a 1.
 
 Oh, but South Dakota State sure did make it interesting for a while Thursday.
 
 The Jackrabbits of the Summit League gnawed away at Gonzaga for the better part of 35 minutes before the Zags started looking like the No. 1 seed they are and pulled away for a 66-46 victory in the West region.
 
 Jordan Mathews scored 16 points to lead the Bulldogs (33-1). No. 1 seeds are now 129-0 vs. 16s since the bracket was expanded to 64 teams in 1985.
 
  said Gonzaga coach Mark Few, who also sweated out a six-point win over Southern as a No. 1 in 2013 -- in the same arena, no less. 
 
 The Jackrabbits (18-17) weren't your typical 16. They came in with nine wins in their last 11 games. They beat Gonzaga to every loose ball at the start and led for the first 17 minutes, then kept it interesting deep into the second half.
 
  Jackrabbits coach T.J. Otzelberger said. 
 
 They hung in without a breakout game from Mike Daum. The nation's second-leading scorer finished 7 for 16 from the floor with 17 points -- more than eight below his average.
 
 Daum did a nice job on Gonzaga's 7-foot-1 center, Przemek Karnowski, holding him to four points over the first 32 minutes.
 
 But Karnowski , who finished with 10 points, scored three straight buckets for the Bulldogs to help them expand the lead to 20 with 5 minutes left, and it was over.
 
 Not before a bit of a scare, though.
 
  Few said. 
 
 STOPPER: The Bulldogs draped 6-9 forward Johnathan Williams on Daum for most of the game, and he kept the South Dakota State big man in check. Williams finished with six points, 14 rebounds and two blocks, though his biggest contributions didn't show up on the stat sheet. Williams said he got used to covering players like Daum from his years practicing against former Bulldog Kyle Wiltjer, who was an inside-outside shooter like Daum.  Williams said.
 
 PLAYING FOR BILLY: South Dakota State guard Michael Orris made this game a tribute to his older brother , Billy, who died in a motorcycle accident in 2015. Orris, who graduated from Northern Illinois, had another year of eligibility and extended his career with the Jackrabbits. Orris went out with a leg cramp in the second half but returned. He finished with four points and three assists.  Orris said of his first and only trip to the tournament. 
 
 FRESHMAN CONTRIBUTION: While the Zags were struggling to find their footing in the first half, freshman Zach Collins kept them in it. Collins had nine of his 10 points in the first half.
 
 `D' UP: Both teams walked away satisfied with their efforts on defense. This was only the fourth time this season Gonzaga has been held under 70 points and only the second time it shot worse than 40 percent (39.7). But South Dakota State only shot 31 percent, and one of its best 3-point shooters, Reed Tellinghuisen, went 1 for 10 behind the arc.  Collins said.
 
  : Gonzaga plays the winner of Thursday afternoon's 8-9 matchup between Northwestern and Vanderbilt.
 
 Arizona's freshman combination of Lauri Markkanen and Rawle Alkins didn't act their age Thursday night in their NCAA Tournament debut. The pair combined for 40 points as the Wildcats began what's expected to be a deep postseason run.
 
 Markkanen scored 20 points as second-seeded Arizona cruised to a 100-82 victory over No. 15 North Dakota in the first round of the NCAA's West Regional. It was just the third time Arizona has scored 100-plus points in their NCAA Tournament history.
 
  Arizona coach Sean Miller said. "I've answered a lot of questions on how we've weathered a lot of the obstacles and adversity that we dealt with this season. A lot of times I answered by, we have three freshmen that are excellent players, but bring no drama to the table and they do their job and are consistent.
 
 
 
 Arizona used a 13-1 run early in the first half to take 24-13 lead and never looked back. The Wildcats (31-4) lead 53-37 at halftime thanks to a dominant 16-point half from Markkanen and a 61.1 shooting percentage in the first 20 minutes.
 
 The Wildcats will face seventh-seeded Saint Mary's in the second round on Saturday. The Gaels beat VCU 85-77.
 
 It was almost as if Arizona's players were taking turns scoring. Allonzo Trier continued his late-season success and had a highlight tomahawk dunk to push the lead to 44-27. He finished with 18 points.
 
 Alkins was aggressive early and scored 20 on 8-for-8 shooting while Dusan Ristic started hot in the second half and added 12 points.
 
  Alkins said.
 
 Markkanen, who's expected to be a high first-round NBA draft pick, was a constant as North Dakota couldn't match his size (7-foot, 230 pounds) or skill.
 
 Quinton Hooker led the Fighting Hawks (22-10) with 25 points and Drick Bernstine added 20.
 
  North Dakota coach Brian Jones said. 
 
 North Dakota played with energy throughout and never quit, but was simply overmatched. Arizona was bigger and outscored the Fighting Hawks 54-34 in the paint. North Dakota never seemed to be able to get easy baskets.
 
  Hooker said. 
 
  
 
 North Dakota: The Fighting Hawks were playing with house money in their first NCAA Tournament appearance as a Division I program. They joined Division I full time in 2012-13. North Dakota played hard, but just didn't have the athletes to hang with the Pac-12 champs.
 
 Arizona: The Wildcats did exactly what they were supposed to do, outside of taking their foot off the gas in the second half. This is a team that won the Pac-12 regular season and tournament and has Final Four aspirations. Arizona has advanced to the Elite Eight three times under Miller, but has not reached the Final Four since 2001.
 
 OUT OF SIGHT, OUT OF MIND
 
 The 2016 tournament was a disappointment for Arizona as the Wildcats were bounced in the first round. The program hadn't lost in the first round since 2008, though it missed the tournament in 2010 and 2012. A strong start is good for the psyche.
 
 QUOTABLE
 
  Miller said. "That's important in a game like tonight, to play to your strengths.
 
 
 
  
 
 Arizona will face No. 7 seed Saint Mary's (29-4) in the second round on Saturday.
 
  Trevon Bluiett doesn't spend a lot of time worrying about missed shots because he knows the makes will eventually come.
 
 After missing his first seven shots and contributing just 3 points in the first half, Bluiett found his rhythm Thursday night to lead No.11 seed Xavier to a 76-65 upset of sixth-seeded Maryland in the first round of the NCAA Tournament. Bluiett shot 6 of 7 during the final 20 minutes to finish with 21 points.
 
  said Bluiett, the Musketeers' leading scorer. 
 
 Bluiett made four 3s in the second half to help Xavier come back from a 6-point deficit.
 
 The Musketeers move on in the West region , marking the third straight year they have advanced to the second round. They will play third-seeded Florida State, which beat FGCU 86-80, in the second round on Saturday.
 
 Maryland, which started three freshmen for much the season, lost in the first round for the first time since 1997.
 
 Maryland came in favored after finishing second in the Big Ten during the regular season but the Terps seemed to be one of the more vulnerable No. 6 seeds in the tournament, primarily because of their youth. Maryland's young players struggled at times as Xavier shifted from zone to man-to-man. Kevin Huerter finished with 19 points but was just five of 13 from the field and star junior Melo Trimble couldn't find a rhythm against the Musketeers zone, going 1 for 9 from 3-point range to finish with 13 points, three assists and three turnovers.
 
  said Xavier coach Chris Mack. 
 
 Maryland coach Mark Turgeon said his players had difficulty trying to beat Xavier's defense. The Terps went long stretches without making baskets and shot just 26 percent from 3-point range, worse in the second half as Xavier played mostly zone.
 
  Turgeon said. 
 
 The Terps also had no answer for Xavier big man Sean O'Mara, who had a career night off the bench, forcing his way in the paint. O'Mara, who finished with 18 points on 5 of 6 shooting from the field and 8 of 9 from the free throw line, dominated as Bluiett struggled and kept the pressure on the Terps' two big men.
 
  O'Mara said.
 
 The Musketeers also got a huge contribution from Kaiser Gates off bench with 11 points. Xavier's bench outscored the Terps 30-13 and outrebounded them 11-4 in a game that was fairly close throughout.
 
  Mack said.
 
 TRIPLE DEFENSE
 
 Xavier flipped between man-to-man and zone throughout most of the game, but Turgeon believes they played more variations than that.
 
 
 
 GODD LUCK ORLANDO
 
 Xavier has won seven straight games in Orlando, which also include two neutral site tournament wins in the Advocare Invitational and Tire Pros Invitational.
 
 BILL MURRAY SIGHTING
 
 Actor Bill Murray was in attendance in support of Xavier. Murray's son, Luke Murray, is a second-year assistant coach for the Musketeers.
 
 At Northwestern, the party goes on.
 
 At Vanderbilt, there is only one question: What was he thinking?
 
 Northwestern's first-ever NCAA Tournament victory, 68-66 over Vanderbilt, came after Commodores guard Matthew Fisher-Davis inexplicably grabbed Bryant McIntosh of the Wildcats on purpose, sending McIntosh to the free throw line for the go-ahead points with 14.6 seconds left.
 
  Fisher-Davis explained after Thursday's heartbreaker in the West region. 
 
 And though Fisher-Davis scored 14 of his 22 points in the second half to help ninth-seeded Vandy (19-16) rally from 15 points down, his mistake was the main takeaway from this game -- maybe not as bad as Chris Webber calling a timeout that Michigan didn't have or Georgetown's Fred Brown throwing the pass to James Worthy of North Carolina in the final, but certainly not one for the  video, either.
 
  Northwestern coach Chris Collins called it. 
 
 The sequence was set up after Riley LaChance made a layup with 17.8 seconds remaining to put the Commodores up by one.
 
 But seconds after the in-bounds pass, Fisher-Davis reached out and grabbed McIntosh around the waist while the Northwestern guard was dribbling up the backcourt. That put eighth-seeded Northwestern in the double bonus, and McIntosh went to the line and calmly swished the free throws with 14.6 seconds left for a 67-66 lead.
 
  he said. 
 
 Northwestern forced LaChance to miss a 3 on the next possession and the Wildcats made (24-11) another free throw.
 
 Fisher-Davis heaved a desperation shot at the buzzer, but it missed, and he sunk his head and reached down to his shoes in despair before heading to the sideline where his teammates hugged him.
 
 While the Wildcats doused Collins with water to celebrate a win that extends the program's first trip to March Madness by at least one more game, there were red eyes in the Vanderbilt locker room. But Fisher-Davis' teammates had his back.
 
  forward Luke Kornet said. 
 
 Coach Bryce Drew, who enjoyed a much different moment decades ago as a player , said certainly he and his star guard would talk more in the near future. His message in the aftermath was simple: 
 
 Fisher-Davis, a junior who led the SEC in 3-point shooting last season, tried to keep it in perspective.
 
  he said. 
 
 MCINTOSH MOMENT: McIntosh said he, like most players, has always dreamed about scoring the winning points in March Madness. Just not quite that way.  The junior led the Wildcats with 25 points.
 
 FISHER-DAVIS SCORES: Fisher-Davis hit two 3-pointers during a 12-0 run that kept Vanderbilt in it after falling behind by 15 with 13 minutes left. He also had back-to-back buckets and made all three free throws after being fouled on a 3 to pull Vandy within 59-58 at the 2:40 mark.
 
 ON HAND: Collins called the pro-Wildcats crowd one of the best he's seen at the tournament. He played at Duke.  he said.
 
  : Northwestern will play top-seeded Gonzaga in the second round of the West Region on Saturday.
 
 Middle Tennessee took down another Big Ten team in the NCAA Tournament, though the latest victory didn't really feel like an upset.
 
 The Blue Raiders stood up to Minnesota's rugged defense, then blew past the foul-prone Golden Gophers for an 81-72 victory on Thursday.
 
 Middle Tennessee proved it was no one-year wonder after shocking Michigan State as a No. 15 seed last March.
 
  coach Kermit Davis said. 
 
 Reggie Upshaw scored 19 points and Giddy Potts added 15 for the Blue Raiders (31-4), who move on to face fourth-seeded Butler in the second round on Saturday.
 
 No longer a mystery team in March, Middle Tennessee played like seasoned NCAA veterans with the way they held off the Gophers' comeback attempt from a 17-point deficit in front of a loud and large contingent of Minnesota fans.
 
 Upshaw, a senior captain, responded with seven straight points, including a 3-pointer and a reverse layup during a 7-3 run to help give Middle Tennessee a 10-point lead with 3:40 left.
 
  Davis said when asked if he would classify the win as an upset. 
 
 The Blue Raiders set a school record for victories and a Conference USA record with 17 league wins.
 
 A season of redemption came to an end for fifth-seeded Minnesota (24-10), which bounced back from an eight-win season in 2015-16 to return to the NCAAs.
 
 Amir Coffey had 17 points to lead Minnesota, while Dupree McBrayer added 16.
 
  center Reggie Lynch said.
 
 Trailing 37-31 at halftime, Minnesota was still in relatively good shape given that Lynch played just 9 minutes because of foul trouble. The Gophers had just two first-half turnovers, but shot 38 percent from the field (10 of 26) in the period.
 
  
 
 Middle Tennessee: Six-foot-10 forward Brandon Walters added punch off the bench in the first half with eight points, giving the versatile Blue Raiders another scoring threat. Potts said before practice on Wednesday that his team could keep up with any tempo, and the Blue Raiders proved it after taking advantage of Minnesota when Lynch was on the bench.
 
 Minnesota: It was a bitter ending for a team that bounced back from a five-game losing streak at midseason. But the Gophers program is back on solid footing after returning to the NCAAs for the first time since 2013.
 
 Coach Richard Pitino said it would take a few days to put the season into proper perspective. The Gophers will return nearly every key contributor except for senior Akeem Springs (9.5 points per game.)
 
  Pitino said. 
 
 FOUL TROUBLE
 
 The Gophers got in trouble after the 6-10 Lynch, the Big Ten defensive player of the year, got saddled with fouls. The athletic Blue Raiders attacked the lane with Lynch sidelined.
 
 The foul trouble played right into Middle Tennessee's plans. Upshaw and JaCorey Williams (13 points) are both 6-8 forwards with versatility.
 
  Davis said. 
 
 SWITCHING IT UP
 
 Middle Tennessee alternated defenses between a 1-3-1 and 2/3 zones, and man to man, throwing off Minnesota just enough to slow down the Gophers. Guard Nate Mason finished with five points on 2-of-10 shooting, including 1 of 7 from 3-point range. Mason, who had four turnovers and three assists, was also slowed by a hip injury in the second half.
 
  Upshaw said about the 1-3-1 look. 
 
  
 
 Middle Tennessee faces No. 4 seed Butler in a South Region second-round game on Saturday at the Bradley Center.
 
  There's little left for Bronson Koenig to accomplish at Wisconsin. Over four years, he has done it all, seen it all.
 
 He's not ready for his run to end.
 
 Koenig made a school-record eight 3-pointers and scored 28 points and fellow senior Nigel Hayes added 16 as NCAA Tournament-tested Wisconsin advanced in the East Region with an 84-74 victory over Virginia Tech on Thursday night.
 
 With Koenig and Hayes leading the charge, the eighth-seeded Badgers (26-9) made all the big plays in the closing minutes to set up a meeting with top-seeded Villanova on Saturday. The Wildcats shook off a sluggish and strange first half and downed Mount St. Mary's 76-56.
 
 Koenig made five 3-pointers in the second half and the Badgers needed every last one.
 
  Wisconsin coach Greg Gard said. 
 
 No team understands the survive-and-advance mentality in this tourney better than Wisconsin, the only school in the country to make the Sweet 16 in the last three years. And the Badgers turned to Koenig and Hayes, two of their four senior starters, to get them within one win of another trip to the third round.
 
  said Hayes, who added 10 rebounds. 
 
 Zach Leday scored 17 of his 23 points in the second half to pace the ninth-seeded Hokies (22-11), whose first NCAA visit since 2007 ended quickly.
 
 Wisconsin has won 12 NCAA games in the past four tournaments, a testament to the Badgers' consistency as Koenig and Hayes have helped push the Big Ten power among the nation's elite programs.
 
 Koenig's seventh 3-pointer -- and fourth of the second half -- put the Badgers ahead 63-59 with 8:21 remaining, and after Virginia Tech got within one, he dropped another corner 3 -- that one hitting the front of the rim and bouncing off the backboard before dropping through the net.
 
  he said with a shrug.
 
 Koenig couldn't miss, but while he did his damage from the outside for Wisconsin, the Hokies attacked inside with Leday muscling for layups off nice feeds from Seth Allen and Justin Robinson.
 
 Virginia Tech was still within 74-73 when Hayes, who leads all active players with 146 career points in the tournament, scored underneath and completed a three-point play to give Wisconsin a little breathing room.
 
 After Allen missed a 3, Koenig was off the mark, but junior center Ethan Happ scored on a putback, giving Wisconsin a 79-73 lead. Virginia Tech missed a few deep shots and Hayes came up with a huge tap-back rebound before Koenig was fouled and dropped both free throws to make it 81-74.
 
 Ty Outlaw scored 16 points and Robinson had 11 for the Hokies. Allen shook off a toe injury and finished with 10, but was only 3 of 10 from the field.
 
  Leday said. 
 
 HOBBLED HOKIE
 
 Allen left the court in the first half to get treatment on his toe. He moved well in the second half, but wasn't the same.
 
  coach Buzz Williams said. 
 
 ON WISCONSIN
 
 The Badgers have played in 19 straight NCAA tournaments and improved to 15-3 in the round of 64 since 2000.
 
  
 
 Wisconsin: With Koenig, Hayes and junior Happ, the Badgers have the necessary know how and talent to make another deep run. They made the title game in 2015.
 
 Virginia Tech: Williams has quickly turned around the Hokies program in just three years as they have moved themselves up the ladder in the ACC.
 
  
 
 Wisconsin: A date with the tourney's top-seeded team.
 
 Defensive-minded Virginia showed it can play with a little offensive tempo, even using five guards to outpace UNC Wilmington.
 
 London Perrantes scored 24 points, Marial Shayok added a career-high 23 off the bench and No. 5 seed Virginia rallied from 15 points down to beat 12th-seeded UNC Wilmington 76-71 in the opening round of the NCAA Tournament on Thursday.
 
 Perrantes scored 19 points in the second half as the Cavaliers (23-10) got their slow-paced offense going. His biggest bucket was a driving bank shot with 1:37 remaining, which put the Cavs up 71-66.
 
 UNCW (29-6) wouldn't go away, though. Chris Flemmings drained a 3-pointer from the elbow and then Devontae Cacok hit a layup to make it 73-71 with less than a minute to play. But Shayok answered on the other end, banking in a runner that gave the Cavs some breathing room in the closing seconds.
 
  Shayok said. 
 
 Virginia advanced past the first round for the fourth consecutive year and won as a No. 5 seed for the first time in four tries. The Cavs can thank Perrantes and Shayok for making it happen.
 
 Perrantes was 9-of-14 shooting, and Shayok was 8 of 14. The guard duo set the pace late after Virginia trailed big.
 
 The Cavaliers closed the first half with a 16-1 run that erased the double-digit deficit.
 
  UNCW guard Ambrose Mosley said. 
 
 UNCW was nearly perfect early, with Mosley, Denzel Ingram and Cacok hitting every shot they took.
 
 The result was a 15-point lead for the Seahawks. They controlled tempo, were seemingly first to every loose ball and looked like they would become the latest No. 12 seed to win in the opening round of the NCAA Tournament.
 
 In the previous five years, half of the 12 seeds (10 of 20) have bounced No. 5 seeds.
 
 But Perrantes and Shayok didn't let it happen again.
 
  Perrantes said. 
 
  
 
 UNC Wilmington: The Seahawks, who averaged 85.2 points a game this season, wanted a high-scoring affair and surely would have liked their chances with it in the 70s. But their inability to slow down Perrantes and Shayok, a big guard combination, proved to be the difference.
 
 Virginia: Maybe the Cavs can score enough to be a factor in the tournament. Many believed their defense-first philosophy would be problematic, but if Perrantes and Shayok keep making shots, there's little doubt this team can keep winning.
 
 OFF NIGHT
 
 UNCW's leading scorer, guard C.J. Bryce, struggled in every aspect of the game. Bryce was 2-for-11 shooting, including 0-for-2 from behind the arc, and even missed three free throws. He finished with eight points, ending his streak of scoring in double figures at nine games.
 
  Bryce said. 
 
  
 
 Virginia: Plays the winner of No. 4 seed Florida and 13th-seeded East Tennessee State on Saturday.
 
 Saint Mary's coach Randy Bennett sounded relieved to advance to the second round of the NCAA Tournament on Thursday night and grateful, even, to be done with Virginia Commonwealth.
 
 Jock Landale had 18 points and 13 rebounds as seventh-seeded Saint Mary's held on for an 85-77 victory over No. 10 VCU in the opening round of the NCAA Tournament's West Region.
 
  Bennett said. "We're happy to get this one done.
 
 
 
 The Gaels led most of the way, but had to fight to hold on after the VCU defensive pressure started to become too much in the second half.
 
 Saint Mary's will face second-seeded Arizona, which beat North Dakota 100-82, in the second round on Saturday.
 
 Joe Rahon and Calvin Hermanson finished with 16 points apiece for Saint Mary's.
 
 JeQuan Lewis paced VCU with 30 points.
 
 Saint Mary's (29-4) took a 46-31 lead into halftime thanks to a 23-6 run highlighted by back-to-back 3-pointers from Hermanson. The Gaels shot 64 percent in the first half and hit 4 of 9 from behind the arc as VCU (26-9) struggled to disrupt their halfcourt offense. On top of that, Saint Mary's was the team able to get out on the break and score in transition. That's VCU's style of play, but the Rams managed just two fast-break points in the first half.
 
  Rahon said. "We're kind of ingrained to be in the right spots and just read and react.
 
 
 
 The next 20 minutes were a stark contrast.
 
 Saint Mary's began turning the ball over from VCU's increased pressure, which led to fast-break opportunities for the Rams. Once it began scoring more consistently, VCU was able to set up its vaunted press and cause havoc.
 
  VCU coach Will Wade said. "They are a tremendous team both offensively and defensively.
 
 
 
 The Gaels' offense that was so crisp in the first half struggled to find rhythm after the break, but VCU kept fouling and sending them to the line for free points. The freebies kept the Rams from getting over the hump and their last lead was at 18-17.
 
  VCU forward Mo Alie-Cox said, 
 
  
 
 VCU: The Rams just weren't able to impose their will on Saint Mary's, like it has against so many others. The high-speed, plenty-of-pressure brand of basketball just didn't disrupt the Gaels as much as they hoped. VCU made a second-half run, but it wasn't enough.
 
 Saint Mary's: The Gaels simply couldn't miss in the first half, then they did enough to hold on in the second 20 minutes. The No. 2 defensive team in the country clamped down on the perimeter, but allowed a little more penetration than it would like.
 
 FREEBIES
 
 VCU committed 32 fouls and Saint Mary's hit 29 of 39 free throws, including 29 second-half attempts. VCU was 17 of 26.
 
 PROGRESS
 
 Three of the Gaels' four losses this season came against No. 1-seeded Gonzaga. They return to the tournament for the first time since 2013. Saint Mary's hasn't advanced past the second round since 2010.
 
  
 
 Saint Mary's will play Arizona on Saturday.
 
 Butler pushed around a team that had designs on following in its bracket-busting footsteps.
 
 With the way Avery Woodson shot from the perimeter in the first half Thursday, the Bulldogs had little to worry about down the stretch against Winthrop.
 
 Woodson scored 18 points and tied a career high with six 3-pointers in his tourney debut, and the fourth-seeded Bulldogs contained star guard Keon Johnson in a 76-64 win over the 13th-seeded Eagles in the first round of the NCAA Tournament.
 
  Butler coach Chris Holtmann said. 
 
 Woodson, a graduate transfer from Memphis, hit five 3s in the first half to help the fourth-seeded Bulldogs build a 14-point halftime lead. A 12-2 run in the middle of the second half gave Butler a 60-43 lead with less than eight minutes left and put the game out of reach.
 
 Xavier Cooks had 23 points to lead the Big South champion Eagles (26-7).
 
  Winthrop coach Pat Kelsey said.
 
 Butler (24-8) looked comfortable all afternoon at the Bradley Center, the home of Big East rival Marquette. The last time the Bulldogs played in Milwaukee, Woodson scored 17 points in a 68-65 victory over Marquette last month.
 
 Once a mid-major darling, Butler set the tone with an aggressive style befitting a midseason Big East game.
 
  said Johnson, who finished with 18 points on 7 of 19 shooting.
 
 One more win in Milwaukee and Butler could advance to its fifth Sweet 16 since 2003.
 
  said Butler guard Kamar Baldwin, who defended Johnson for much of the game.
 
  
 
 Winthrop: The loss ends the stellar college career of Johnson, a dynamic guard who can drive fearlessly and pull up for a 3. Kelsey called Johnson the  the Eagles. He led the team to its first NCAA appearance since 2010.
 
  him, Kelsey said.
 
 Butler: The hot start from 3-point range bodes well for a team that shot 36 percent from behind the arc coming into the game. The Bulldogs finished 8 of 19 from 3 (42 percent) against Winthrop thanks in large part to Woodson.
 
  Baldwin said. 
 
 SECOND-HALF SURGE
 
 Tyler Wideman's dunk on an alley-oop pass from Tyler Lewis made the crowd swoon and gave Butler a 62-43 lead with 7:22 left.
 
 Defense, though, carried the Bulldogs during their second-half run after Winthrop went more than three minutes without a field goal.
 
 Johnson, a 5-foot-7 guard, scored seven straight points during one stretch of the second half to get the Eagles within seven with 13:28 to go. Otherwise, the 6-foot Baldwin, did an admirable job sticking with Johnson, the Big South Player of the Year.
 
  Holtmann said.
 
 QUOTABLE
 
  -- Holtmann, on Winthrop's Johnson.
 
 RANGY COOKS
 
 Cooks, a lanky 6-foot-8 swingman, had good looks on drives in the lane in the first half but had trouble getting shots to fall. He finished 10 of 22 from the field and 3 of 10 from behind the arc.
 
  
 
 Butler moves on to a second-round matchup Saturday against fifth-seeded Minnesota or 12th-seeded Middle Tennessee.
 
 After watching countless hours of video on Florida forward Devin Robinson, East Tennessee State coach Steve Forbes knew he would be a matchup problem.
 
 Seeing the 6-foot-8 Robinson in person made it even more obvious.
 
  Forbes said. 
 
 Robinson tied his career-high with 24 points, Kasey Hill added 14 and No. 4 seed Florida used a second-half surge to beat 13th-seeded East Tennessee State 80-65 in the opening round of the NCAA Tournament on Thursday.
 
 Robinson, an NBA prospect who had been relatively quiet of late, scored his most points in nearly two months. He made 10 of 17 shots and chipped in seven rebounds. The speedy Hill reached double figures for the fourth consecutive game. He also added six rebounds and five assists for his most complete game in a month.
 
 Kevarrius Hayes, filling in for injured center John Egbunu, finished with seven points, seven rebounds and six steals. He broke the school record for steals in an NCAA Tournament game.
 
 Florida (25-8) needed all those contributions, especially since coach Mike White got so little from leading scorer KeVaughn Allen and Southeastern Conference Sixth Man of the Year Canyon Barry. Allen and Barry scored seven points apiece and were 2 of 15 combined.
 
  White said. 
 
 Allen and Barry will have a chance to bounce back Saturday when the Gators play fifth-seeded Virginia in the second round of the East Region.
 
 Florida blew open a close game with a barrage of 3-pointers in the second half. Robinson hit consecutive 3s, and then Allen followed with a wide-open look from the top of the arc. Chris Chiozza added two more a few minutes later, and the rout was on.
 
 It was a stark contrast from the first half in which the Gators couldn't find their range. They missed their first eight 3-point attempts and finished 1 of 10 from behind the arc in the opening 20 minutes.
 
  ETSU's Hanner Mosquera-Perea said. 
 
  
 
 ETSU: The Buccaneers had won nine of their last 10 and thought this would be their year to get their first NCAA Tournament win since 1992. Still, Forbes has the program on the right track even though it includes adding disgruntled transfers and guys from the junior college ranks.
 
 Florida: The Gators had played a lot of  after Egbunu's season-ending knee injury, with White going with a lot of three- and four-guard lineups. But he went big Thursday by getting freshman Gorjok Gak some minutes. Gak helped the Gators maintain a post presence with Hayes on the bench, finishing with four points and a rebound.
 
 HALFTIME CHAT
 
 Leading by a point at halftime, White wasn't pleased with his team's performance and he let his guys know it.
 
  Robinson said. 
 
 CROMER CROWS
 
 ETSU's standout T.J. Cromer scored a team-high 19 points on 7-of-13 shooting, but the Gators were more pleased with how they defended Desonta Bradford. The guard finished with just four points on 2-of-7 shooting and missed all three 3-point attempts.
 
  White said. 
 
  
 
 Florida plays fifth-seeded Virginia on Saturday, and the Gators surely will have another home-crowd advantage.
 
 After watching countless hours of video on Florida forward Devin Robinson, East Tennessee State coach Steve Forbes knew he would be a matchup problem.
 
 Seeing the 6-foot-8 Robinson in person made it even more obvious.
 
  Forbes said. 
 
 Robinson tied his career-high with 24 points, Kasey Hill added 14 and No. 4 seed Florida used a second-half surge to beat 13th-seeded East Tennessee State 80-65 in the opening round of the NCAA Tournament on Thursday.
 
 Robinson, an NBA prospect who had been relatively quiet of late, scored his most points in nearly two months. He made 10 of 17 shots and chipped in seven rebounds. The speedy Hill reached double figures for the fourth consecutive game. He also added six rebounds and five assists for his most complete game in a month.
 
 Kevarrius Hayes, filling in for injured center John Egbunu, finished with seven points, seven rebounds and six steals. He broke the school record for steals in an NCAA Tournament game.
 
 Florida (25-8) needed all those contributions, especially since coach Mike White got so little from leading scorer KeVaughn Allen and Southeastern Conference Sixth Man of the Year Canyon Barry. Allen and Barry scored seven points apiece and were 2 of 15 combined.
 
  White said. 
 
 Allen and Barry will have a chance to bounce back Saturday when the Gators play fifth-seeded Virginia in the second round of the East Region.
 
 Florida blew open a close game with a barrage of 3-pointers in the second half. Robinson hit consecutive 3s, and then Allen followed with a wide-open look from the top of the arc. Chris Chiozza added two more a few minutes later, and the rout was on.
 
 It was a stark contrast from the first half in which the Gators couldn't find their range. They missed their first eight 3-point attempts and finished 1 of 10 from behind the arc in the opening 20 minutes.
 
  ETSU's Hanner Mosquera-Perea said. 
 
  
 
 ETSU: The Buccaneers had won nine of their last 10 and thought this would be their year to get their first NCAA Tournament win since 1992. Still, Forbes has the program on the right track even though it includes adding disgruntled transfers and guys from the junior college ranks.
 
 Florida: The Gators had played a lot of  after Egbunu's season-ending knee injury, with White going with a lot of three- and four-guard lineups. But he went big Thursday by getting freshman Gorjok Gak some minutes. Gak helped the Gators maintain a post presence with Hayes on the bench, finishing with four points and a rebound.
 
 HALFTIME CHAT
 
 Leading by a point at halftime, White wasn't pleased with his team's performance and he let his guys know it.
 
  Robinson said. 
 
 CROMER CROWS
 
 ETSU's standout T.J. Cromer scored a team-high 19 points on 7-of-13 shooting, but the Gators were more pleased with how they defended Desonta Bradford. The guard finished with just four points on 2-of-7 shooting and missed all three 3-point attempts.
 
  White said. 
 
  
 
 Florida plays fifth-seeded Virginia on Saturday, and the Gators surely will have another home-crowd advantage.
 
  Florida State made the most of its first NCAA Tournament appearance since 2012, beat a Sunshine State opponent.
 
 The third-seeded Seminoles held off No. 14 Florida Gulf Coast 86-80 in a West Region game Thursday night despite some sloppy play that allowed a late double-digit lead to disappear. The Seminoles made some clutch free throws and came up with just enough stops in the waning moments to spoil the Eagles' upset bid.
 
  said Dwayne Bacon, who led the Seminoles with 25 points. 
 
 The victory sets up a second round matchup between the Seminoles and No. 11 seed Xavier on Saturday. FSU knows it must play better if it doesn't want to be the next upset for the Musketeers, who stunned No. 6 Maryland earlier Thursday night.
 
 The Seminoles missed some free throws down the stretch Thursday that helped create some drama at the end.
 
  said FSU coach Leonard Hamilton, whose team improved to 26-8. 
 
 It marred a narrative in which the Seminoles dominated a game with two athletic teams that get up and down the floor and finish well around the rim. The Seminoles beat the team known as  at its own game most of the night.
 
 The crowd was mostly behind the Seminoles with many fans making the trip from the north part of the state.
 
 Both teams like to dominate the paint, but the Eagles found that hard to do with 7-foot-1 Michael Ojo and 7-4 Christ Koumadje taking turns protecting the rim. That forced FGCU to rely heavily on its perimeter shooting, which wasn't the Eagles strength Thursday night.
 
 The Seminoles had nine blocked shots on the night while holding the Eagles to 29 percent shooting from 3-point range and 41 percent from the field. FSU shot nearly 56 percent from the field while shooting primarily high-percentage shots.
 
 Brandon Goodwin led the Eagles with 28 points and Zach Johnson added 17.
 
  said FGCU coach Joe Dooley, whose team ends its season at 26-8. 
 
 In addition Bacon, FSU got big production from Jonathan Isaac (17 points and 10 rebounds) along with Terance Mann (11 points) and Xavier Rathan-Mayes (10).
 
 WINNING WAYS
 
 FSU now has three consecutive opening game wins in the NCAA Tournament and its ninth first-round win in 15 NCAA appearances.
 
 TOURNAMENT REGULARS
 
 Florida Gulf Coast was in the NCAA Tournament for the third time in five years. FGCU made it to the Sweet 16 in 2013.
 
 The drought is over for Purdue. Vincent Edwards and company finished it off with one big push against Vermont.
 
 Edwards scored 15 of his 21 points in the second half, and the Boilermakers held off the Catamounts 80-70 on Thursday night for their first victory in the NCAA Tournament in five years.
 
 Caleb Swanigan added 16 points, 14 rebounds and four assists for fourth-seeded Purdue (26-7), which lost to Arkansas-Little Rock in double-overtime in the first round last year. It also dropped its tournament opener to Cincinnati in 2015.
 
  Edwards said. 
 
 It was the first NCAA Tournament victory for the Boilermakers since they beat Saint Mary's in the first round on the same day in 2012. Next up is No. 5 seed Iowa State, which advanced with an 84-73 win against Nevada.
 
  said Dakota Mathias, who made three 3-pointers and finished with 13 points. 
 
 It was Vermont's first loss of 2017. The Catamounts (29-6), the regular-season and tournament champions in the America East, had the nation's longest active win streak at 21 games. But they lost versatile senior Kurt Steidl to a knee injury in the first half and were unable to make up for a huge disadvantage inside against the bigger, stronger Boilermakers.
 
 Anthony Lamb had 20 points and nine rebounds, and Trae Bell-Haynes finished with 15 points, seven boards and six assists.
 
  Catamounts guard Dre Wills said.
 
 With Swanigan and 7-foot-2 center Isaac Haas, Purdue had a sizeable advantage in the paint. But the Catamounts played tough perimeter defense, turning post passes into a risky proposition, and stayed right with the Boilermakers with opportunistic baskets on offense.
 
 But the combination of Edwards and Swanigan was too much to overcome down the stretch. Edwards scored Purdue's first eight points of the second half, helping the Boilermakers open a 45-38 lead.
 
 Every time Vermont made a charge in the second half, Purdue had a response.
 
  coach Matt Painter said. 
 
 Darren Payen made a jumper and Ernie Duncan hit a 3 to get the Catamounts within one before Swanigan responded with a 3 for the Boilermakers. A jumper by Lamb trimmed Purdue's lead to five, but Carsen Edwards and P.J. Thompson each hit a 3 to make it 76-65 with 1:56 remaining.
 
 The Boilermakers finished with a 38-28 rebounding advantage and outscored the Catamounts 42-24 in the paint. They also shot 52 percent from the field.
 
  said Thompson, who finished with 10 points. 
 
 AILING
 
 Steidl went down after he jumped out to defend a 3-point attempt with about 2 minutes left in the first half. A trainer worked on his left leg for a short while before the swingman was helped to the locker room, walking on his own, but with a pronounced limp.
 
 Coach John Becker said Steidl was headed to the hospital after the game for further evaluation.
 
  Becker said.
 
  
 
 Vermont: Becker said he was proud of his team for how it battled the Boilermakers all night long. He also praised his players for their accomplishments this season.
 
 Purdue: The Boilermakers had eight turnovers in the first half and two in the second half. If they can take care of the ball the way they did after the break, they will be one tough out with their imposing front line.
 
  
 
 The Boilermakers face the Cyclones in the second round on Saturday.
 
 The Fighting Irish avoided the dreaded upset from a 12th seed in the first round of the NCAA Tournament.
 
 Barely.
 
 Bonzie Colson scored 18 points and the West Region's fifth-seeded Fighting Irish avoided a meltdown in the final two minutes to hang on for a 60-58 win over the Princeton Tigers on Thursday afternoon.
 
 After Notre Dame's Matt Farrell missed the front end of a one-and-one with a 59-58 lead, Princeton had a chance to win on its final possession. Devin Cannady missed an open 3-pointer , and Notre Dame's Steve Vasturia pulled down the rebound and was fouled.
 
  Notre Dame coach Mike Brey said. 
 
 The Fighting Irish players appeared stunned walking off the floor.
 
 Those players included Farrell, the usually clutch-shooting point guard, who hit six of nine for 16 points. He wore a scowl as he nearly left the floor through the wrong exit after Cannady's miss.
 
 Ferrell finished with 16 points but in a game the Fighting Irish (26-9) nearly squandered an 11-point second half lead.
 
 Notre Dame improved to 9-2 in its past 11. The Fighting Irish have also won seven of nine tournament games over the past three years, and they are the only team to reach the Elite Eight in each of the past two seasons.
 
 Notre Dame led 59-54 with 1:10 left when Colson hit a pair of free throws.
 
 The Tigers scored the next two baskets. Pete Miller put back a missed Cannady 3-pointer with 54 seconds left.
 
 Farrell missed a 14-footer, and the Tigers cut the lead to 1 when Miller scored again, this time putting back a miss by Steven Cook.
 
  Colson said.
 
 Spencer Weisz led Princeton with 15 points. The Ivy League champion Tigers (23-7) had a 19-game winning streak going into the NCAA Tournament.
 
  Princeton coach Mitch Henderson said. 
 
 Cannady thought his shot was on target.
 
  said Cannady, who hit just two of 10 3-point attempts and finished with seven points. 
 
 The Tigers were making their 25th tournament appearance and have lost in the first round in each of their past four trips. They haven't won since the fifth-seeded Tigers defeated UNLV 69-57 in 1998.
 
 Princeton is known for making things tough on highly seeded teams .
 
 In 1989 the Tigers nearly became the first No. 16 seed to take down a No. 1, when coach Pete Carril and his undersized squad took mighty Georgetown and twin towers Alonzo Mourning and Dikembe Mutombo, to the final buzzer in a 50-49 loss.
 
 Seven years later, Henderson played for Carril's 13th-seeded squad that scored a 43-41 first-round upset of defending national champion UCLA.
 
  Henderson said. 
 
 The Tigers led just once in the first half, building a 17-15 edge with 11:24 remaining, when Amir Bell scored on a transition drive, was fouled and completed the three-point play. The Fighting Irish regained the lead two minutes later when Colson scored from the right post.
 
 COMING OUT COLD: The Tigers missed five of their first six attempts through the first 5 1/2 minutes, with Weisz scoring the only basket, a 3-pointer 2:55 in to cut Notre Dame's lead to 4-3.
 
 CHRIS CHRISTIE SIGHTING: New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie watched the game from behind the Notre Dame bench. Christie's son Andrew played baseball at Princeton, while his daughter, Sarah, has been a Fighting Irish team manager. Christie is also a long-time friend of Brey.
 
 IN STITCHES: Fighting Irish guard Rex Pflueger left the game about six minutes in with a cut to his left forehead after being elbowed by Princeton's Cook. The cut required between six to seven stitches. A TV sideline reporter said Pflueger asked a fan to take a picture of his stitches because he thought they looked cool.
 
  :
 
 Notre Dame: Plays winner of 4th-seeded West Virginia versus 13th-seeded Bucknell on Saturday.
 
 Coach Bob Huggins has spent the past 10 seasons establishing West Virginia's reputation on playing a stifling press defense.
 
 The Mountaineers performance on Thursday left Huggins relatively unimpressed despite opening the NCAA Tournament with an 86-80 win over Bucknell on Thursday.
 
  Huggins said.
 
 It wasn't easy for the 63-year-old coach to stomach watching West Virginia pull ahead by double digits in each half only to allow the Bison to mount a comeback .
 
 Nathan Adrian scored 12 points and had 10 rebounds, while Tarik Phillip scored 16 points, including hitting all four free throws in the final minute to secure the victory.
 
 Even Huggins' players acknowledged they can play better.
 
  Adrian said. 
 
 At least, West Virginia (27-9) avoided a repeat of last year's first-round meltdown when the third-seeded Mountaineers lost to Stephen F. Austin .
 
 The win sets up a meeting against the region's fifth-seeded Notre Dame Fighting Irish, who hung on for a 60-58 win over Princeton.
 
 Kimbal Mackenzie made 5 of 7 3-point attempts and led the Patriot League-champion Bison with 23 points. Bucknell (26-9) entered the tournament having won six straight and 14 of 16.
 
 Credit Bucknell for not collapsing.
 
 Trailing 27-12 in the first half, the Bison closed West Virginia's deficit to 36-33 on Avi Toomer's layup.
 
 Then after Elijah Macon completed a three-point play to put the Mountaineers up 45-33 in the opening seconds of the second half, Bucknell eventually closed the margin to 63-60 on Mackenzie's contested 3-point basket from the left corner with 8:58 left.
 
  Mackenzie said. 
 
 Bucknell won twice this season when trailing by 11 or more points.
 
 The Mountaineers' superior size proved a difference by out-rebounding Bucknell 42-32 and a 20-6 edge in second-chance points.
 
 What was troubling is how the Mountaineers forced only 15 turnovers, well below the nation-leading 20.4 they were averaging entering the game.
 
 At least West Virginia's offense played to its high-scoring potential.
 
 The Mountaineers scored 85 or more points for the 17th time this season. And with 2,873 points, they're now 12 away from breaking the school's single-season record set by the Jerry West-led team in 1958-59.
 
 It didn't help that Bucknell's top player, Nana Foulland, missed a five-minute stretch of the second half after picking up his fourth foul with 9:37 left.
 
 The Patriot's league's MVP and defensive player of the year finished with 18 points and seven rebounds in just 30 minutes.
 
 HEADS UP PLAY
 
 The Mountaineers press defense was at its best five minutes into the second half when Adrian dived to the paint to steal an inbounds pass and then fed Lamont West for a dunk.
 
  Huggins said of Adrian's steal. 
 
 On the ensuing inbounds pass, Bucknell's Toomer was whistled for an offensive foul against Adrian, who unfortunately missed both free-throw attempts.
 
 HUGGY BEAR
 
 Huggins took his familiar spot on a personal stool between his bench and the scorer's table. A day earlier, Huggins spoke about enjoying his previous trips to Buffalo , where he's now 4-0 as West Virginia coach -- including 3-0 in tournament games. Huggins liked the city so much, he even returned to enjoy a successful fishing trip on Lake Erie.
 
 FLASHING THE TREY
 
 Mackenzie was so sure his open 3-pointer from the right corner was going in, he twirled and faced away from the basket, winked and flashed three fingers at Bison fans in the nearby stands. Sure enough, the shot swished through the net, cutting West Virginia's lead to 58-55 with 12:18 remaining.
 
  
 
 West Virginia: Plays fifth-seeded Notre Dame on Saturday.
 
  Derrick Walton Jr. stuck to the plan Friday.
 
 He kept running the Michigan Wolverines offense against an aggressive Oklahoma State defense and eventually things fell into place. Again.
 
 Walton scored 26 points and had 11 assists as the Wolverines made a school record 16 3-pointers in an NCAA Tournament game, getting past Oklahoma State 92-91 in the first round of the Midwest Regional.
 
  Walton said. 
 
 Coach John Beilein had no complaints.
 
 Seventh-seeded Michigan needed every point it could muster in a game that ended with a parade to the free-throw line, a buzzer-beating 3-pointer and a foe that refused to go away.
 
 The difference: Poise and emotion, the same components that helped Michigan (25-11) overcome last week's harrowing plane mishap to sweep four games in four days at the Big Ten Tournament.
 
 Early Friday, it looked like Michigan's momentum was waning. The Wolverines (25-11) looked out of sync and out of sorts in the first half.
 
 But rather than change the game plan, Walton followed the script, steadied his team and the shots started going.
 
 While Michigan made only five shots inside the arc in the second half, it went 11 of 15 from 3-point range -- drawing increasingly louder roars from the crowd and more bewilderment from first-year Cowboys coach Brad Underwood.
 
 Walton wound up 6 of 9 on 3s, and Zak Irvin made four more in front of his hometown crowd. Irvin finished with 16 points.
 
  Underwood said. 
 
 For Michigan there was no victory celebration -- only relief after winning the highest-scoring game in this year's tourney.
 
 The Wolverines have won six in a row and need one more to reach their first Sweet 16 since 2014.
 
 Juwan Evans scored 23 points and Jeffrey Carroll had 19 to lead Oklahoma State (20-13), but the nation's eighth-highest scoring team just couldn't keep up with Michigan's 3-point barrage.
 
 The 10th-seeded Cowboys finished the season with four straight losses and haven't won an NCAA game since 2009.
 
 Michigan erased a six-point second-half deficit with a run of four 3s, the last from Walton with 12:28 to go to take a 62-61 lead. They made three more in another flurry to take a 76-68 lead with 6:47 to go.
 
 But the Cowboys rallied, cutting the deficit to two twice in the final 8 seconds -- only to watch the Wolverines close it out at the free-throw line.
 
  Beilein said. 
 
  
 
 Michigan: The Wolverines certainly have momentum. After winning four games in four days to claim the Big Ten Tournament title, Michigan might be the hottest team left in the tourney field.
 
 Oklahoma State: For the Cowboys, the NCAA Tournament has been problematic. They've won only one NCAA game since 2006 and will have to wait at least another year to improve on that.
 
 KEY STATS
 
 In addition to shooting 64 percent from the field in the second half and 51.8 percent for the game, the Wolverines had only four turnovers. They came into the game leading the nation at 9.42 per game.
 
 D.J. Wilson had 19 points and four blocks for the Wolverines.
 
  
 
 Michigan faces the winner of Louisville-Jacksonville State on Sunday in Indianapolis. The Wolverines have never faced the Gamecocks, while they last faced the Cardinals in the 2013 title game.
 
  Mangok Mathiang scored 18 points and Deng Adel added 16 Friday to help second-seeded Louisville pull away from Jacksonville State 78-63 in the first round of the Midwest Regional.
 
 The Cardinals (25-8) have won five straight opening round games. Louisville was making its first postseason appearance since 2015 after sitting out last year because of a one-year, school-imposed postseason ban for alleged recruiting violations.
 
 Norbertas Giga scored 30 points for 15th-seeded Jacksonville State (20-15), which was one of a record five teams making their first tourney appearance.
 
 And it was a bigger challenge than most expected.
 
 But after trailing for the first 13 minutes, the Cardinals finally took the lead with an 8-2 late in the first half. They closed the half on a 9-4 spurt then opened the second half on 10-2 run to make it 48-33. Louisville led by double digits most of the rest of the game.
 
 The Cardinals made it clear Thursday they had no intention of going home early after losing in the ACC Tournament opener last week.
 
 And once Louisville seized control, they made sure they would be back in Indianapolis on Sunday.
 
 Jacksonville State committed 14 turnovers but looked out of sync most of the second half.
 
 Still, the Gamecocks refused to let Louisville completely run away. A 7-0 run cut the deficit to 10 midway through the second half and a banked 3-pointer from Malcolm Drumwright made it 61-52 before Louisville finally put it away. Drumwright finished with 12 points.
 
 Quentin Snider had 16 points for Louisville. Ray Spalding added 11 points for the Cardinals and Donovan Mitchell had nine points and 10 rebounds.
 
  
 
 Louisville: The Cardinals are seeded second for the third time in tourney history and won national titles each of the two previous times. It's too early to start contemplating how far this run could go. But Louisville has won by 15-point margins in each of its two games at Bankers Life Fieldhouse this season.
 
 Jacksonville State: After going from last in the Ohio Valley Conference preseason picks to conference tourney champs, the Gamecocks' magical run came to an end. But the future still looks bright. Three starters will return next season as coach Ray Harper begins his second season with the Gamecocks.
 
  
 
 Louisville faces seventh-seeded Michigan on Sunday for a ticket to the Sweet 16. The Cardinals have won all three meetings in the series, including the 2013 national championship game.
 
 With star big man Chris Boucher cheering in a bulky knee brace from the sidelines, Tyler Dorsey scored 24 points to lead four players in double figures, and No. 3 seed Oregon beat 14th-seeded Iona 93-77 Friday in the first-round of the NCAA Tournament's Midwest Region.
 
 The Ducks (30-5) showed they have depth and sheer athleticism to make a special March run, just as coach Dana Altman hoped this week when he challenged role players to make larger contributions in shot-blocker Boucher's absence.
 
 Iona star Jordan Washington gave his team a huge scare when he went down hard under Oregon's basket, screaming in pain and grabbing his lower left leg with 1:12 to go before halftime. But the senior forward returned to start the second half and finished with 22 points on 10-for-16 shooting and 11 rebounds in his final college game for the Gaels (22-13).
 
 Boucher was relegated to a cheerleading role for the Ducks, who shared the Pac-12 regular-season crown with Arizona then lost by three points to the Wildcats in the conference tournament final after Boucher tore his left ACL in the semifinals.
 
 Oregon, which had its 27-point lead trimmed to 13 in the second half before holding on, shot 63.6 percent with only three turnovers in the first half to take control, began the second half with a 10-1 burst and went 55.6 percent from the floor overall.
 
 Boucher shimmied his shoulders during a timeout and carefully stood from his chair to pump his fist and root for his guys, hardly the kind of finish he envisioned for his final collegiate season.
 
 For Iona, Washington limped off with help just before halftime at first-year Golden 1 Center, home of the NBA Sacramento Kings.
 
 He brought energy on both ends to lead the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference champs, driving for a pretty spin move with 11:46 left in the first half then taking a charge from Dorsey moments later. He then drew another one.
 
 Washington scored 14 of his team's initial 18 points, but Oregon led 55-37 at halftime.
 
 Sam Cassell Jr., son of the former NBA star, scored 16 points in his final collegiate game. He pumped his arms and kicked out a leg when Oregon called timeout after Iona pulled to 29-26 with 8:35 to play in the first half on consecutive 3s by Cassell and E.J. Crawford.
 
 Jordan Bell delivered back-to-back layins as the Ducks answered, then his putback with 4:27 left in the half extended Oregon's lead to 41-33.
 
  
 
 Iona: Iona shot just 3 for 11 from 3-point range in the first half before hitting seven second-half 3s. ... The Gaels were outrebounded 40-27. ... They faced Oregon for the first time.
 
 Oregon: The Ducks have won at least one NCAA game in five straight years. ... In the first half, Bell became the school's career NCAA Tournament rebounding leader, passing former teammate Elgin Cook's 49. ... Brooks moved into fourth place on the Ducks' single-season scoring list.
 
  
 
 Oregon advances to play Sunday against the winner of Friday's second game between sixth-seeded Creighton (25-9) and No. 11 Rhode Island (24-9).
 
 After two years of surprise early NCAA Tournament exits, Baylor finally broke through.
 
 Al Freeman came off the bench to score 21 points, and the third-seeded Bears defeated No. 14 seed New Mexico State 91-73 on Friday in the first round of the NCAA's East Regional.
 
 Reserve forward Terry Maston scored 19 points, Jo Lual-Acuil scored 16 and Johnathan Motley added 15 points and 10 rebounds for Baylor (26-7), which suffered upset losses to Georgia State and Yale in the first round the previous two years.
 
 Motley said the previous losses served as motivation.
 
  he said. 
 
 Ian Baker and Braxton Huggins each scored 19 points for New Mexico State (28-6). In the end, Baylor's athletic ability, length and depth were too much for the Aggies to handle. Baylor blocked seven shots .
 
  New Mexico State coach Paul Weir said. 
 
 It looked like Baylor might be headed for another disappointing early exit. Huggins hit a 3-pointer at the buzzer to give New Mexico State a 40-38 lead at the half. The Aggies made 6 of 14 3-pointers before the break to counter Baylor's 55 percent shooting.
 
 Baylor took control for good with a 14-3 run early in the second half that gave the Bears a 58-47 lead and forced a New Mexico State timeout. The Bears held the Aggies to 37 percent shooting after the break.
 
  Motley said. 
 
 ----
 
  :
 
 New Mexico State: The Aggies gave the Bears all they could handle for a half. The Western Athletic Conference tournament champions led early in the second half and gave Baylor's normally stout defense fits. The Aggies had a 20-game win streak earlier in the season and remained proud of what they accomplished this season.
 
  Weir said. 
 
 Baylor: The Bears got a much-needed win after a shaky finish to the season and re-established its defensive dominance in the second half. The Bears looked like the team that started the season 20-1 and was ranked No. 1 in the nation.
 
 SHARP SHOOTING
 
 Baylor shot 57 percent from the field in the game, and was better than 50 percent in both halves. The Bears also shot 50 percent from 3-point range (4 for 8) and made 17 of 19 free throws.
 
 BENCH SCORING
 
 Baylor's bench outscored New Mexico State's 42-16. The Bears' reserves made 16 of 25 shots.
 
  Baylor coach Scott Drew said. 
 
  
 
 New Mexico State: Season is over.
 
 Baylor: Will play the winner of the SMU-USC game.