I'm not annoyed, I really am shocked, not how Mount St. Mary's played, but that we didn't start the game with energy. We don't have time to figure it out.
 
 
 
 
 
 I was thinking we could get the win,
 
 
 
 
 
 They outplayed us, At the end, we had more size and some more talented players who made plays. They deserve a lot of credit.
 
 
 
 
 
 I'm not worried about him at all,
 
 Mayhem
 
 
 
 I thought we were capable of coming out and, you know, missing some shots, coming out and making some mistakes, But the level of energy we started the game with, I just didn't think we were capable of that. I'm in a little bit of shock myself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I want him to come out firing like that, He thinks he's going to make every shot. I love that.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Everyone got a glimpse of how good we can be, It shows that when you have a program, no matter your seed, and you have guys committed to a plan and a high level of enthusiasm, that anything is possible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That 1-16 game, someone else can have that from here on out, I've served my time in it. I'll go ahead and land somewhere else.
 
 
 
 There's something about sports where you have a look in your eye and you look at your opponent and say, `You're going to be in for a fight tonight, I thought we did that from start to finish.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That was a confident, well-coached, tough team, They were one of those teams that came here on a roll.
 
 I just moved my feet, made him close out and tried to make it tough for him. But he's a tough player,
 
 It means the world to me, It's exactly what me and coach talked about and exactly what I wanted for my life and my last season.
 
 
 
 We knew on the defensive end we were doing our jobs, and eventually, the shots were going to fall,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I'm so proud of these two guys,
 
 Tonight was a great example. First round of the NCAA Tournament, you'd expect freshmen sometimes to have a struggle. Lauri and Rawle were our two best players tonight.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We just wanted to play hard and show that we belong here,
 
 
 
 
 
 They really dominated the paint in the first half, We thought we did a good job of fighting and trying to make them battle for catches further out on the floor. But they were so big. They would go and counter it and shoot right over the top of us.
 
 
 
 It was good for us to just let them know that it wasn't going to be easy coming to play North Dakota, It was going to be a fight.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We utilized our size,
 
 We wish we felt better about our defensive effort and we'd have put together one heck of a game.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Once I get a couple to go in and get a rhythm going then everything starts to fall, Everything you shoot just feels good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I just believe in my players, Maryland is really good against man-to-man offensively. We don't want Quentin Goodin to be chasing Melo Trimble all over the floor so zone is fairly effective at times.
 
 
 
 The changing defenses gave us more problems than anything tonight, I think they got hot and we kind of got rushed a little bit.
 
 
 
 My teammates got me the ball in great positions and pretty much all I had to do was throw up five foot hook shots and make a couple of back-to-the-basket moves to score,
 
 
 
 When you get production like that with those two it just makes us that much tougher to defend,
 
 
 
 
 
 They were playing 3 different defenses and everybody has to recognize it. We didn't and that really hurt us.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I actually thought we were down one, Coach ... pointed at him, but he was just telling me that was my matchup. I took it as (I should) foul.
 
 One Shining Moment
 
 An honest mistake, You feel bad for players. He was tremendous today. Certainly, I was surprised.
 
 
 
 
 
 When he grabbed me, I had thought we were down one, and I'm thinking maybe I made a mistake, I had to put my mind on making the free throws at the end.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He's the type of person (who's going to) feel some blame, But in the second half, we have no chance if he doesn't make the shots that he made. We're with him no matter what.
 
 From Day 1, we teach our guys that we're a team and one play at the end ... doesn't win or lose the game.
 
 
 
 We all love each other like brothers, They know I didn't do that on purpose, obviously. We had a great season. Nothing to be ashamed of.
 
 You don't imagine yourself down one and being fouled. You envision yourself hitting the game-winner. But to be able to do that at the free throw line was relaxing.
 
 
 
 When you dream about these games, you don't dream about losing them. You don't dream about playing scared. You don't dream about being timid. You dream about playing with confidence, and you dream about winning,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We think we belong on a national stage, I knew we'd play well and we did so today.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I don't think so at all, We have a lot of respect for Minnesota, but I think our record speaks for itself, and what we've done all year long.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We don't believe in moral victories, but honestly I'm so proud of this team and this is probably one of the most historical Gopher teams,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I know that going into next year ... they raised expectations so quickly, And next year it's going to be even more.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 You look at how JaCorey and Reggie play, it's really 17-18 feet downhill off the dribble, We've had a lot of success whenever we've been able to spread the floor and drive the bigs.
 
 
 
 
 
 It kind of threw their guards off. It definitely threw off Mason, He's used to coming down the court and creating mismatches on ball screens.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I've seen him do a lot of things, I've watched him win two state championships. Obviously, I've watched him for four years here with us. He's a heck of a player.
 
 
 
 I think it definitely helped a lot for us to have the older guys that we have to have been through some of the runs that we've had in the tournament, I think it showed with Bronson, the way he responded to each time they went on a run. Each time they hit a big shot he responded with a big shot. And it's something that you need.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I was feeling it a little bit,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We fought as hard as we could, At the end of the day, they made more winning plays than us. We gave it our all, we just came up short.
 
 
 
 
 
 Our team knew he has really bad turf toe, Our team doctor was here. He obviously played less minutes (25) than normal. We've obviously endured a short roster all year long. He wasn't the reason why we lost, but it was a part of the story, for sure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I just wanted to provide energy off the slow start, Personally, I just didn't want to go out like that, and I knew my teammates didn't either. So I just wanted to come out and provide what I could on both ends and just bring a spark.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In the game we tried everything to stop their run, It's hard because you want to win every game; especially having an easy lead like we did in the first half.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I think we had the last run, Obviously, we knew at the beginning that they were going to make some tough shots. The point guard made some big shots with a hand in his face. Everybody seemed to have made shots. So I kind of just knew that, hopefully, they were going to start missing and we were going to start making them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I didn't have my best game, Some shots didn't drop for me and my teammates. ... I took a couple tough shots early, (and) that affected my touch throughout the game. I tried to start getting to the line more, but they just didn't drop for me tonight.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 They're hard to put away,
 
 We did a really good job of handling their pressure. ... They just keep coming, they're so quick and aggressive. ... It's hard to play against (them). Pressure's hard to play against.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Press break is something we work on every practice,
 
 We've been in this situation before. ... We were able to use our experience and kind of respond.
 
 
 
 
 
 There is no shame in losing to Saint Mary's,
 
 Our guys fought extremely hard. We are really tough to knock out, but we could never get over the hump and get the lead in the second half.
 
 
 
 They made big plays when they needed to, and every time we would go on a run, they would make a big play. They just took advantage of all our overaggressive mistakes the whole time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I liked their attention to detail, for the most part. I liked their ability to share the ball, for the most part, I thought we did some good things against a quality team.
 
 
 
 
 
 They jumped on us early and that's a hard team to come back on because of their style of play,
 
 
 
 
 
 They were a big, physical team,
 
 
 
 We feel like home wherever we go,
 
 
 
 heart and soul
 
 He's one of the best players in the history of this school and I thought (Butler) did a very good job in their game plan in trying to contain
 
 
 
 He got hot early, kind of cooled down in the second half, But we're going to need him to keep taking those shots to get through this March Madness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He's so dynamic with the ball. I thought Kamar worked extremely hard to make it difficult for him,
 
 
 
 Listen, my staff just told me that I look terrible. That I look like I haven't slept. The reason was that kid. He's a load to guard.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He's downright scary, His length really affected us.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That's kind of who we are, And it takes a special group to be able to be successful while that happens. KeVaughn's not hanging his head right now. KeVaughn is happy that we won. Devin would be the same way if KeVaughn was sitting here right now.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We lost control of the game, They came out (and) played harder than we did. We didn't play our A-game in the second half so they came out and punched us in the mouth. We started making mistakes and we just kept doing that.
 
 
 
 
 
 small ball
 
 
 
 
 
 He just laid it out for us like, `Hey, if you all want to go home, lay it down right now. If you all want to advance, these are things you need to do to be successful, We listened to him, took that in, and came out with a big second half.
 
 
 
 
 
 Cromer gets all the headlines, deservedly so, Cromer is a terrific player. Bradford may be their most valuable player. And KeVaughn started on him and guarded him for a lot of the game.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He's downright scary, His length really affected us.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That's kind of who we are, And it takes a special group to be able to be successful while that happens. KeVaughn's not hanging his head right now. KeVaughn is happy that we won. Devin would be the same way if KeVaughn was sitting here right now.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We lost control of the game, They came out (and) played harder than we did. We didn't play our A-game in the second half so they came out and punched us in the mouth. We started making mistakes and we just kept doing that.
 
 
 
 
 
 small ball
 
 
 
 
 
 He just laid it out for us like, `Hey, if you all want to go home, lay it down right now. If you all want to advance, these are things you need to do to be successful, We listened to him, took that in, and came out with a big second half.
 
 
 
 
 
 Cromer gets all the headlines, deservedly so, Cromer is a terrific player. Bradford may be their most valuable player. And KeVaughn started on him and guarded him for a lot of the game.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 There is some satisfaction because we won, All that other stuff, how the game looked, that doesn't matter when you win.
 
 
 
 
 
 When we hit our free throws, we don't have an issue, We didn't shoot free throws very well down the stretch, and if you don't knock those free throws down, you put yourself in position where this stuff can happen. It makes everything look bad.
 
 Dunk City
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It's hard to simulate what (the Seminoles) do, You can't simulate height and length and athleticism like they have.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Both of those games just replayed in my head all year, even though we had seasons to play, I still could replay it almost every last three, four possessions, in each of those games. So to come out here, I just really wanted the win.
 
 
 
 It feels good but I don't think we want to stop here, We play a good opponent the next game, have a quick turnaround, we've got to take care of ourselves and get back at it.
 
 
 
 
 
 We played a really good first half and were able to stay neck-and-neck with them, but in the second half they just made a few more plays and hit a couple of 3s down the stretch and they're a really good team,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our guys, you know, answered every one of their runs by either going inside, knocking down 3s, and they were a good team, One of the best teams we've faced all year.
 
 
 
 
 
 It's huge, we got the monkey off our back with two first-round exits the last two years with pretty good teams, We had a hell of a year this year. The last thing we were going to do is lose in the first round.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I feel terrible for Kurt because I know how much this meant to him,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We gave everybody a show, right? We escaped. We've been in a lot of games like that where game situations need a big defensive stop. We've been there. I'm proud we're still alive.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No matter how it looked, we got the win and that's all that matters,
 
 
 
 We had a shot, Right now, this one hurts. When you're in the locker room, it's hard to say a proper `Thank you,' because it feels like goodbye.
 
 
 
 I looked at the rim and when it went out of my hand, I thought it was good, But it didn't go in. It happens when you take those kinds of shots.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This team has been punched in the face a little through the season, but they always responded, They did a great job. I was pleased with the chances we had.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Well, we weren't very good today,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We've got to get our heads right and play defense like we know how to, We've got to play a little better defense, but we'll fix it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We've been down a couple of times. We've been down big. And we know we're a mentally tough team that was able to fight back, We had a lot of weapons and we didn't panic.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When he makes a play like that that that other people think is a great play, we see him do it every day, So I don't think anybody thought it was anything out of the ordinary.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We haven't played a team that got up into us in a minute. It's hard to simulate that in practice, In the second half, I settled down. I wanted to make the right play consistently.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 You go 11 for 15, that's hard enough to do in a gym by yourself, We shot 55 percent in the NCAA Tournament and just lost in the first round, outrebounded an opponent 40-21 and you lose.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shooting the ball from 3 is part of our package, Today we were really good at hitting the open man. We valued every possession.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No one wants to leave the tournament early, Our ultimate goal was to come in and just win it, so we want to just take every game for what it is and make sure we come in and just play our hardest, play desperate, because after this, you lose, you go home. So we knew one team was going home today, and we made sure it wasn't us.
 
 
 
 We beat a lot of teams this year that we weren't supposed to beat, we beat a lot of teams that were flat-out better than us, We were trying to do it against one more team tonight, and we were trying to do that with what I think we showed for 20 minutes, which is a team that just plays really hard, a team that plays together.
 
 
 
 
 
 We know the tournament is about making runs, They made their run, and it was our job to come back and make our own run. So we went in at halftime and made some adjustments, made sure we carried out those adjustments, and good things happen when you follow the game plan.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It sucks the way it ends, I wish we had a different ending to all this, but I think whenever we sit back and look back on the season and look as the successes that we had, we're all going to look on this team really fondly one day and have memories for a long, long time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All year long, our depth has been a real strength, Al (Freeman) and T.J. (Terry Maston) had monster games, and that's what the beauty of having depth is.