	Five and a half miles above sea level.  The high Himalayas stand fixed against the wind and clouds.  The air is so thin it is not life-sustaining.  Within hours, the living begin to deteriorate.  But humans come here, and struggle for each breath to stand briefly, on the highest point on Earth.	In 1996, eight people died in a single day on Everest.  Scientists believe many, if not all, of those deaths could have been due to hypoxia, or lack of oxygen to the brain.	For every six successful summits on Everest, one person will die. With more people climbing into the Death Zone, above 26,000 feet, one critical question is how oxygen deprivation affects the brain.  David Breashears, a high altitude climber and filmmaker, has stood on top of Everest three times.	David was making the IMAX film, Everest, last year when a storm claimed eight climbers' lives. He helped rescue some, but others were beyond help.  He is returning to film and will lead an expedition that will explore the effects of altitude on the body and mind.	On the early Everest expeditions, climbers trekked for weeks to get to the base of the mountain.  Today, they fly into a Sherpa village at 9,000 feet.  It will take 10 days to ascend the 9,000 feet in elevation to Everest Base Camp. Base Camp is a temporary city of tents housing 300 people to support nine expeditions.  The accommodations may be crude, but most teams have a satellite link to the outside world.	David Breashears meets up with his team members, and they scope out the route of the mountain.	David Carter, from Indiana, is returning to Everest after an unsuccessful attempt in 1991.	Ed Viesturs will be guiding Carter.  Considered one of today's premier high altitude mountaineers, Ed has climbed Everest four times—twice without oxygen.	Jangbu Sherpa climbed Everest for the second time on David's last expedition.  He is in charge of the large Sherpa staff that will support the team.  These climbers will take part in a battery of scientific tests that will gauge their performances at altitude.  Ed Viesturs lives and trains in Seattle. Two weeks before leaving for the mountain, the climbers joined him at the University of Washington for baseline tests.  Dr. Brownie Schoene looks for physiological clues that determine who will perform well at altitude. One determinant is lung capacity.	When we breathe in, oxygen molecules pass through the lungs into the air sacs.  Here, purple oxygen-deficient blood cells become revitalized and red with oxygen, and are pumped by the heart through out the body.  Dr. Schoene measures the climbers' heart rates and ability to work. Carter is well above average.  At the elite level are Ed Viesturs and David Breashears.	High on Everest, many climbers approach their maximum heart rate just gasping in the thin air. Some may collapse, unable to go on.	The amount of oxygen in Carter's blood is measured by Dr. Howard Donner.	Carter is now given a decreased level of oxygen to simulate going to high altitude.  His body strives to get more oxygen.  As Carter's blood oxygen saturation falls, his breathing increases and his heart speeds up, trying to pump more blood made red with oxygen to his organs.  Over time, more oxygen-carrying blood cells will be produced to carry the oxygen where it is most needed, to the muscles and brain.  These physiological changes are called acclimatization, and they enable a person to survive at high altitude.	Due to this sudden exposure to high altitude, Carter's oxygen saturation plummets.  He will ultimately pass out from the lack of oxygen to his brain.	Dr. Peter Hackett addresses the climbers on the effects of decreased oxygen to the brain.	Psychometric testing will reveal subtle changes in the climbers' abilities to process information as they go higher.	Dr. Howard Donner treks into Base Camp, where he will be stationed to monitor the health of the climbers.	A blood oxygen level of 74% would be alarming at sea level, but is normal for someone who has just reached 18,000 feet.	As Howard acclimatizes over the next few days, the level of oxygen in his blood should increase. If it doesn't, he may become with acute mountain sickness.	As symptoms get worse, a portable hyperbaric chamber, known as a Gamow Bag, can help.	The bag is inflated to increase the pressure inside.  This results in a higher density of oxygen molecules.	This simulates a descent of several thousand feet, where the ambient air holds more oxygen.	Within seconds, the pressure decreases, and the patient returns to 17,600 feet.	The Khumbu Icefall is a steep glacier, riddled with deep crevasses and huge ice blocks.  It can only be traversed with the use of ladders and rope fixed and maintained by a team of Sherpas. It is here at the beginning of the climb where the greatest objective dangers on Everest lie. On this section, four ladders are strapped together to help climbers scale a 100-foot wall of ice.  Jangbu and David use mechanical ascenders to climb up the fixed ropes. This is called jumaring.  The Icefall is a jigsaw puzzle of giant blue ice puzzle pieces the size of houses, weighing some 30 tons each.  Without warning, the blocks can shift, and crevasses cave in, taking climbers with them.  David jumars up the last pitch of the Icefall to arrive at Camp I.	Along with Ed Viesturs, David Carter has also reached Camp I.	At the top of the Icefall, there is a bottleneck of climbers.  Ed Viesturs puts on his pack at the back of the line.	It's only one at a time on the ropes.  Ed, David, and Carter all descend back down to Base Camp from Camp I.  This will be the first of many trips through the Icefall in their long schedule of acclimatization.  It takes time for the body to adapt to higher and higher altitudes. Climbers will typically ascend to Camp I twice from Base Camp.  They move up to Camp II and sleep there several nights before moving to Camp III.  Before their final push to the summit, climbers descend to Base Camp to rest and gain their strength before trying for the summit. While climbing down through the Icefall, the climbers cross paths with a line of Sherpas bearing loads for the higher camps. Sherpa is the name for the indigenous people who live in the Everest region. Although they adapt well to altitude, they are not immune to its debilitating effects.  If they push themselves to go up too quickly, they too can suffer from acute mountain sickness.  At Base Camp, the climbers hear the disturbing news of a Sherpa who was found near death, lying in the middle of the trail.	The treatment is descent.  If the patient can't walk, then oxygen or a Gamow bag must be used.	The Malaysian expedition doctor measures a sick Sherpa's blood oxygen saturation.	When a helicopter arrives at Base Camp, it means a person is in need of immediate evacuation.  And for Lakba, a quick descent to Katmandu will save his life.  Pilots don't hesitate long here, and they breathe supplemental oxygen.  If suddenly exposed to the altitude of Base Camp, the pilot could become desperately ill from acute mountain sickness.  In the early morning freeze, the climbers silently put on their crampons to climb up through the Icefall for the last time.  The team has been on Everest for several weeks, acclimatizing at the higher camps.  Time is running out for an attempt on the summit.  Carter has developed a high altitude cough, which he knows could jeopardize his chances of completing the climb.	A chilling reminder of how dangerous Everest can be, human remains resurface from the depths of the moving Icefall.	The climbers bypass Camp I and enter the Western Cwm on their way to Camp II.  This high glacial valley is transected by massive lateral crevasses.	If Guy Cotter's symptoms get worse, he will have to descend.  There is a delicate balance between acclimatization and physical decline.  Climbers know that they can only stay at altitude for so long.	In the morning, they march to the top of the Western Cwm, where they begin the arduous ascent of the Lhotse Face.	Sixty percent is low, but Howard is hopeful that Carter's saturations will improve over time. David Breashears interviews Carter an hour below Camp III.	Camp III sits halfway up the Lhotse Face, a 45-degree wall of glacial blue ice.	The pace is slow as Ed and Carter ascend into thin air.  The route is fixed with ropes and they fall into the rhythmic movement of kicking steps, pulling, and stepping up.	Many climbers have died here, slipping off the face from one poorly placed step.	Carter is about to go higher than he has ever been before.  Looking up the route, some 50 climbers clamor towards the highest camp on the mountain. This makes David Breashears and Ed Viesturs very nervous.  They witnessed last year that crowded ropes on Everest can be deadly. This year, it seems nothing has changed.  As climbers wait their turn on the ropes, they increase their chances of becoming hypoxic. Tonight, they will all leave camp and climb toward the summit.  David and Ed climb into the Death Zone, an altitude where humans are only transient visitors.  The tents of Camp IV finally come into view.  It has taken nearly two months for the climbers to reach this point.  And what will transpire over the next 24 hours will change their lives.  Oxygen bottles from expeditions years ago litter this wind-scoured place.	When you die at 26,000 feet, no one has the energy to carry your corpse off the mountain. The climbers are slowly deteriorating, their bodies literally consuming themselves for energy. Simple tasks take longer to perform, and precious energy is burned just gasping for air.  While most climbers are resting, David, Ed, and Carter endure another round of psychometric tests.	David radios Ed, who is in a nearby tent.  The scene feels all too familiar.	It is a brief moment of doubt.  But in the end, David decides to go up, knowing he can always turn around.  Five hours later, the climbers prepare for their departure.  At this altitude, loading a pack and putting on crampons will take two hours.  Each climber carries two bottles of oxygen.  They leave at 10
00 p.m.	At 5
30 in the morning and 300 feet below the summit, David calls down to Howard.	They sit down to rest.  Ten feet in front of them lies the body of Rob Hall, one of the expedition leaders who died in 1996.  David points to where Rob is buried under wind-driven snow.	They have only 300 vertical feet to go, but two hours of climbing. They traverse a knife edge ridge which drops off 8,000 feet on both sides. David climbs in front.  They reach the Hillary Step, a 40-foot wall of exposed rock.  This is the most technical terrain on the summit day. Climbers maneuver up the cracks and over the rocky outcrop while clipped into the fixed ropes. Carter hoists himself up.  Only one climber can ascend at a time.  This is where bottlenecks occur.  They silently pass by the body of a climber from an earlier expedition who died here on the ropes.	They have climbed for nine hours.  Jangbu raises the Tibetan flag on the summit.  David is sitting on the top.  Ed is taking the last steps up with Carter just behind.	David Breashears has reached the summit of Mount Everest for the fourth time.  Ed Viesturs has now become the first non-Sherpa to climb Everest five times and return.  Rob Hall's fifth summit last year was tragically his last.  Carter has lost his voice and will be unable to world's highest psychometric tests.	At 78, David's blood oxygen saturation is good for a climber breathing supplemental oxygen. Climbers consume bottled oxygen at a flow of two liters per minute on a summit day.  With his mask off for a few minutes, David's respiratory rate increases significantly.	Ed takes his final psychometric test on Everest.	It takes five hours to climb down to Camp VI.  In the safety of his tent, David reveals to Howard that he had a difficult climb to the summit.	David Carter's condition has worsened.  Despite his own illness, David Breashears picks up the camera to shoot Ed taking care of Carter.	They have just climbed to 29,029 feet, the summit of Everest, an exhausting accomplishment.  Now, they will try to descend 5,000 more feet to get Carter to a safer altitude.	David Breashears stays at Camp VI to rest, as Ed accompanies Carter.	After hours of labored breathing, Carter gains enough strength to get on the radio.	Carter seems to be improving.  But two hours later—a desperate call from Ed.	Ten days after coming off Everest, the climbers return to Seattle for a final session of testing. The scientists have now had a chance to analyze the data.	Dr. Hackett has looked closely at the MRI scans, searching for abnormalities.  He discovers that exposure to extreme altitude can leave its mark on the human brain.  Hackett addresses the climbers.    During the following program, look for NOVA's Web markers, which lead you to more information at our Web site.    An unknown genius discovered the key to navigating the open seas—time. Now, based on the best selling novel by Dava Sobel, "Lost at Sea - The Search For Longitude."    This program is funded in part by Northwestern Mutual Life, which has been protecting families and businesses for generations. Have you heard from the quite company?  Northwestern Mutual Life.    To be lost at sea meant wandering an empty ocean.  A lonely ship, far from shore and never finding safe harbor.  These perils were the stuff of legend since ships first sailed beyond the sight of land.  But until just over 200 years ago, there was no sure way of knowing the position on the high seas. Navigation because the greatest scientific challenge of the age of sail.    But far away, in a remote English village called "Barrow-on-Humbar," a carpenter named John Harrison was teaching himself clock making.  He had no formal education, but his clocks were highly original.  Harrison learned his craft while observing village life around him.    Neither a university man nor an astronomer, having never been to sea, what role could John Harrison have in solving the greatest technical enigma of his time?    Consider the problems of the sailors and navigators of the 1700s. On the training vessel Eye of the Wind, the passengers and crew are about to experience the challenges of being at sea on board a tall ship and finding their way across vast reaches of open ocean.  Will Andrewes, Curator of Harvard University's Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments, has joined the crew in this exploration of ancient navigation.  They're trying out a replica of a typical log and line of the early 1700s.    Measuring the speed with knots was one of the techniques of dead reckoning.  It was a crude method, and it didn't allow for currents or cross winds, which could easily push a ship off course.  But it was then the only way to estimate distance traveled at sea.    For centuries map makers have used grid lines to indicate points on the surface of the earth.  This grid system evolved into lines of latitude and longitude.  Latitude is represented by parallel horizontal lines circling the earth, with the Equator as the line of zero degrees latitude.    Navigators knew that the height of the noon-day sun varies.  On the equator, it would be high in the sky, but in the far north, the sun remains low on the horizon.   But without any means of figuring longitude - their east-west position—latitude was all navigators could hope to use.   On a damp October day in 1707 a fleet of British warships was returning home from battle with the French.  They were just a day's sail from England.   Although they had no way of determining their exact position, they believed they were safely clear of the treacherous Scilly Islands off the English coast.   But as the ships sailed on, a crash was heard on the lower decks of the flagship.   They had run aground, and the hull had been severed below the water line. One by one, four ships hit the rocks.  And one by one, they sank.  In a matter of minutes, thousands of men drowned and an important part of England's fleet was lost.   The wreck of Admiral Shovell's fleet was a national tragedy. There were days of mourning, official inquiries.  If England was to be master of the seas, how could such a disaster have happened in her home waters?   The unfortunate situation had been exposed, and an outcry finally forced some action.  In 1714 Parliament offered a reward to anyone who could solve the key problem of navigation—how to find longitude at sea.   But if Newton and the Board expected that the huge prize would quickly produce and answer, they were frustrated by the rush of loony, half-backed pamphlets which flooded the book stalls of London.   William Hogarth's etching shows a pack of Longitude Lunatics searching for solutions within their asylum walls.  Finding longitude, in the public's mind, had become the work of madmen.   For John Harrison, at the age of twenty, clock making had become a passion. He was obsessed with accuracy and, by about 1720, he too had become intrigued with the problem of longitude at sea.   Although he was mostly unschooled, Harrison kept a detailed journal.  Some of his writings have survived, and his own words reveal how quickly he grasped the essence of the longitude problem—its connection to time.   In theory, a clock should work.  The earth turns a full 360 degrees in 24 hours, or 15 degrees each hour.   To know the longitude, one must know the time in two places at once.  If a sailor knew when it was noon at the home port—Greenwich England, for example—and then had to wait one our until it was high noon on board his ship, he would know that the ship was 15 degrees west of Greenwich.  If the sailor had to wait two hours for the sun to reach its high point, he was 30 degrees west. The challenge was knowing the time at the home port while sitting hundreds or thousands of miles away.   Harrison understood that an exceptionally accurate timekeeper which would work at sea could solve the problem.  But few clocks had reached the level of accuracy, even on land.  Here, above the stables of the great English country house at Brocklesby Park, one of Harrison's first machines still keeps time. Each Thursday morning the estate's carpenter winds the movement.   It was a wooden clock, like all of Harrison's early timekeepers. Its sturdy frame disguises its extraordinary accuracy and innovative features.   As a carpenter, Harrison knew the properties of wood.  And this led him to anew way of reducing friction, which all clock makers knew was the enemy of accuracy.   But could a clock based on these methods work at sea?   But some way of keeping the time at sea had to be found.   Desperate problems invite desperate solutions.  One fantastic scheme was presented by Professors William Whiston and Humphry Ditton.   If sky rockets were impractical, the sky itself might provide time signals if one knew where to look.   Using a primitive telescope, in 1610 the great astronomer Galileo discovered four moons circling the planet Jupiter.   He carefully charted their motions.  The four moons would become a celestial timekeeper when tables were eventually drawn, to show their positions at seven o'clock each night, precise to within a few minutes.   By the 1660s the Italian disciples of Galileo were close to perfecting his method of telling time with Jupiter's moons.  News of this breakthrough reached the Paris Observatory, which was soon to become the home of the greatest Italian astronomer since Galileo—Giovanni Domenico Cassini.   Using the moons of Jupiter to find longitude promised to revolutionize map making.  And, hoping to provide better maps for his busy map collectors, King Louis XIV set his new Italian astronomer to work.   Cassini would start by measuring the distance from the Paris meridian to the coasts.   When the stunned Louis XIV first saw the new, highly accurate map of his diminished kingdom, he is said to have exclaimed "I have just lost more territory to my astronomers than to all my enemies."   Cassini's method relied on the best telescopes of the day.  It has a high level of accuracy—perhaps a bit too high for the King.  But could the same system be used at sea?   With Jupiter unable to be used as a clock at sea, there seemed to be two alternatives.  Either find a different astronomical clock, or build a mechanical one.  And Newton and the Board of Longitude were skeptical of mechanical clocks.   Working in isolation, John Harrison never heard Newton's doubts; and the labor to perfect his clocks went on.   John Harrison's living room had become a genuine scientific laboratory.   Of the many factors which could degrade a clock's performance, none was worse then the effect slight changes in temperature had on the speed of the movement.   Searching for a pendulum which would not be affected by temperature, Harrison noticed that heat caused brass and iron wires to expand at different rates.  Making use of this observation, he combined wires of the two metals to compensate for expansion, producing and perfecting his gridiron pendulum.  He would succeed only when there was absolutely no time difference between the two clocks, whether hot or cold.  It was brilliant science requiring astonishing feats of observation.  By 1730, John Harrison had collected enough information on the effects of temperature, friction, and gravity to convince himself that he could really build a sea clock accurate and reliable enough to win the Longitude Prize.  For the first time in his life, he ventured beyond the vicinity of Barrow, traveling to London to present his proposal to the esteemed Astronomer Royal, Dr. Edmond Halley, predictor of the comet which bears his name.  Halley arranged an introduction to London's most famous clock maker, George Graham.  After a stay of several weeks Harrison returned to his village. His journals describe his London adventures, and give a glimpse of the country carpenter meeting England's most distinguished scientists.  His plain-spoken memoirs suggest that he was less than impressed by the work of the celebrated George Graham.  Harrison's meeting with George Graham was indeed a turning point. With Graham's support development money began to flow, allowing Harrison to build his first longitude timekeeper, the sea clock known today simply as H-1.  One by one, Harrison attacked the problems of adapting his clocks to go to sea.  Working in brass for the first time, he continued to use wheels of oak to engage rollers of ignum vitae.  To overcome the motion of the ship Harrison replaced his long pendulum with two rocking balance arms with springs to maintain their oscillations.  In 1736, Harrison accompanied his first sea clock on a preliminary testing voyage to Lisbon on board The Centurian.  The stormy five-week journey was to be the only ocean trip of John Harrison's life.  Without even asking for additional tests Harrison put H-1 aside and took on the job of producing what he hoped would be an improved model, H-2.  After two years of painstaking work Harrison noticed a fatal flaw.  When subjected to a specific extreme movement the accuracy of his bar balances was corrupted.  Harrison's development of his large sea clocks was bogging down. Years passed as his quest for perfection led up many blind alleys.  For a man obsessed with time, his own time meant nothing to him.  Both moon and stars move across the night sky.  Astronomers knew that the position of the moon against the stars was unique for every minute of every day.  They had the makings of a true celestial clock if someone could work it all out in advance. Enter the forceful champion of this lunar method, the Very Reverend Nevil Maskelyne.  If John Harrison was the perpetual outsider, Nevil Maskelyne was the perfect insider.  As a well bred, ambitious young astronomer from Cambridge,  Maskelyne set out to make a name for himself within the scientific establishment.  Laboring at Greenwich, Maskelyne observed the motion of the moon against the background of stars.  Eventually, he could predict its position for every minute of every day.  Using these predictions, Maskelyne produced a set of astronomical tables.  Unlike Jupiter, no powerful telescopes were needed.  From his ship, a navigator would measure the angle between the moon and certain stars.  Then, in theory, he could use Maskelyne's tables to find the time at Greenwich, if he had clear weather, precise instruments, and after hours of calculations.  But from a rolling deck just keeping site of the moon was a difficult chore, even without the lengthy computations.  But the Board of Longitude still would not accept that the clock was the answer, and it controlled the funds Harrison desperately needed to work on his difficult H-3.  Harrison continued to work.  In his H-3 he replaced his swinging bar balance with large balance wheels.  Almost as an aside he invented the caged roller bearing, a friction reducing device still widely used today.  And yet, his new clock continued to prove troublesome.  Perhaps Harrison's large timekeepers had reached a dead end.  This was an extraordinary change of direction.  Now Harrison was prepared to reject 25 years of his own work and move ahead on an almost untried technology, struggling to make smaller what he had always assumed should be made larger.  The Board of Longitude ordered H-4 to be tested on a proving voyage from Portsmouth, England to the island of Barbados.  Locked in its new protective box the precious watch had been carefully set to the correct time at Portsmouth using the sighting of the sun at noon.  For 46 days The Tartar sailed southwest across the Atlantic.  The ship passed from the chill of the English Channel to the tropical Caribbean—a temperature difference of 50 degrees.  After a month and a half at sea, on the morning of May 13, 1764, the Tartar dropped anchor off Bridgetown, Barbados.  The watch was rowed ashore to be examined.  To know if H-4 has passed the test the exact longitude of Bridgetown itself had to be determined to a new level of accuracy.  this was clearly work for an astronomer.  In a great irony Nevil Maskelyne, Harrison's chief rival, had been sent to Barbados months earlier to make careful land-based, moons of Jupiter observations for the purpose of determining the correct longitude.  The testing of the clock in Maskelyne's hands was bound to be thorough, but would it also be fair and objective?  Maskelyne's boasting had created an appearance of conflict-of-interest.  A century-long quest for longitude had come down to a contest between the work of two stubborn men on the beaches of a remote tropical island.  At the moment of noon, just as the sun reached its highest point over Bridgetown, William Harrison prepared to unlock H-4's case. The clock had not been reset for forty-six days.  At that same moment the watch indicated that it was 3
55 PM back in Portsmouth.  At fifteen degrees of longitude per hour, the clock placed the Harbor at Barbados just under sixty degrees west of Portsmouth, only a few miles from what we now know to be its actual position.  With Maskelyne now able to influence the Board, Harrison's hope that H-4's performance would quickly gain him the prize began to fade.  On the instructions of Nevil Maskelyne, Harrison's timekeepers were carted away for further tests.  This left Harrison deeply discouraged.  Finally, in 1772, Harrison's son wrote a letter to George III, pleading on behalf of his father.  The two Harrisons were soon granted an audience with the King of England.  And so, forty-three years after a young John Harrison first travelled to London, a reluctant Parliament at the insistence of the King, awarded him the full 20,000 pounds.  In 1995, the first truly world-wide navigation system was realized.  GPS, the Global Positioning System now provides navigators their latitude and longitude within a few feet anywhere on Earth.  As 24 satellites orbit ten thousand miles overhead, their atomic clocks are monitored for almost perfect accuracy.  Today, just as it was three hundred years ago the secret of knowing where you are is knowing what time it is.  	During the following program look for NOVA's Web markers which leads you to more information at our Web site.	Can scientists predict the next disaster in the deadly shadow of Vesuvius?	Naples, Italy.  This ripe and teeming city is one of the most densely populated places in the world.  A million people work here, play here, and love here.  But they live in the shadow of a notorious killer—the volcano Vesuvius.  One of the most lethal volcanos, Vesuvius always lurks in the background, silent, menacing, waiting.  For the people of the region the clock is ticking.	With its unbroken history of deadly eruptions there is little doubt that Vesuvius will kill again.  Dozens of times in the last two thousand years Vesuvius has rent the earth and spewed burning rivers of lava.  In rarer, even more lethal eruptions, it has shot jets of super heated gas, ash, and rock into the stratosphere.  Falling back to earth, these clouds cascade down the mountain in blistering avalanches destroying everything in their path.  For fifty years Vesuvius has been quiet, but there are signs that its long silence may be coming to an end.	When will this now sleeping giant next erupt?  This is the critical question for the people of this region.  And no one wants to know the answer more than the scientists charged with monitoring the volcano.  Lucia Civetta is Director of the Vesuvius Observatory.	Every few months Civetta and her team descend deep into the crater of the volcano.  It is a difficult climb, but Civetta must get some critical measurements.	It will take the team two hours to reach the bottom of the crater. Frequent small rock slides make their long journey into the mouth of the volcano more treacherous.	Civetta and Orsi share a huge responsibility, to protect the people of this intensely volcanic area of Southern Italy.  While Civetta takes the lead on Vesuvius, Giovanni Orsi monitors another less well-known volcanic region.  Ten miles to the west of Vesuvius are the Phlegraean Fields. Thirty-four thousand years ago a massive volcanic eruption formed this eight mile wide depression, or "caldera".	At the rim of this caldera only dimly visible is the edge of Naples, well within the reach of some of the forty small volcanoes that border the Phlegraean Fields.  The most active of these is La Solfatara, Sulpher Earth. This is the gateway to the underworld, at least according to the ancient Romans.  It is claimed as the inspiration for Dante's Inferno.	The steam and gasses strongly suggest that the volcanic material hidden below this crater is volatile.   And there is another warning sign—frequent small earthquakes.	La Solfatara is on the outskirts of Pozzouli, a city literally on the move.  Here is another warning sign of a possible eruption.  As the magma chamber underground slowly rises, it pushes the land upwards.  The sea appears to fall, but it is the town that is rising.	These columns are marked with burrows made by sea mollusks, proof that since the columns were constructed two thousand years ago they have been periodically submerged.	The last eruption in this region was in 1538.  Someday there will be another eruption.  Only its timing is uncertain.	The darkness that fell over the city would last for almost 2000 years.  In the eighteenth century, the men, women, and children who had been silenced in 79 A.D. were finally exhumed from their untimely graves.  During the excavations, archaeologists created plaster casts around their skeletal remains capturing details of the precise moment of their death.  What can these victims reveal about the last hours of Pompeii?  Were they suffocated? Burned? Buried alive?	Haruldar Sigurdsson wanted to understand more about the eruption and the exact sequence of events that took the lives of so many.  The first step was to figure out exactly how the people of Pompeii were killed.  For insight into the events that destroyed Pompeii, Sigurdsson turned to an ancient document, the only  eye witness account of 79 A.D., The Pliny Letters—written by the youth who had watched the eruption from across the Bay of Naples.	It wasn't until they witnessed more contemporary eruptions of other volcanoes that scientists understood what Pliny had observed 2000 years ago—the dark and horrible cloud was probably what is now called a pyroclastic flow.	But how well does the extensive archaeological record in Pompeii support this understanding of the 79 A.D. eruption?  Anthropologists Maceij and Renata Hennenberg travelled ten thousand miles from Australia to examine the remains of a family discovered in a house off one of Pompeii's main streets.	At this "murder" scene, archaeological drawings are the chalk marks around the body on the street.	The position and condition of the skeleton offers clues to the cause of death.	Who were the people who lived here and died here?  Why did they remain when so many others fled the city during the early hours of the eruption?	Protected by thick stone walls, the family waited out the rock showers only to be suffocated later by volcanic gases and ash.  In the courtyard of this once grand residence, the Hennebergs create a facial reconstruction of the patriarch of the ill-fated household.	First, they take the dimensions of his features.	A computer program turns these measurements into a vision of the face that once was.	As they "flesh out" these characters the story of Pompeii comes once more to life.  Here was a large family of prosperous Romans unwilling or unable to flee their home and save themselves.  They succumbed to a horrendous end
 death by suffocation in a cloud of ash and gas.	The women choked to death on the cloud of hot volcanic ash and gas. But Vesuvius was not yet finished with them.  A moment later the heavier pyroclastic flow washed over Pompeii with a destructive of a tidal wave.	First she was suffocated, then dismembered as she fled unprotected in the street.  Eight miles from Pompeii and on the western edge of Vesuvius is Herculaneum.  This ruined city offers more evidence of the force unleashed by the 79 A.D. eruption.	But there was no escape for the people of Herculaneum, scorched and suffocated in the burning surge cloud and then buried under a mountain of pyroclastic debris.  The ancient Romans were witness to one of the most terrifying natural disasters of all time.  The gruesome fate that befell them offers a rare look at the complex chamber of horrors of death by volcano.	The rock layers here, from bottom to top, are a chronology of the infernal 18 hours that destroyed Pompeii.	This indelible geological record correlates precisely with deposits from contemporary eruptions, like Mt. St. Helens and El Chichon—proof that what occurred in 79 A.D. was a pyroclastic eruption.	Was the 1944 eruption the end of a cycle?  Or does it mark the beginning of a new cycle of larger more violent eruptions, like that of 1631—or even 79 A.D.?  Civetta examines remnants of the past eruptions to search for signs of what Vesuvius will do next.	This new finding leads scientists at the observatory to a very somber conclusion.	Perhaps an eruption on the scale of 1631, or even 79 A.D. Photographs of victims of contemporary eruptions are compared to the human remains in Pompeii by a doctor on a gruesome mission.	Six hundred and fifty thousand people live in the death zones around the volcano.	But because the warning signs can begin months or even years before an eruption it is difficult to know for certain when one is eminent.  Few understand the problem this presents as intimately as Franco Barberi.	In 1985, Barberi travelled to Columbia to help monitor another restless volcano, Nevada Del Ruiz.  He and others proposed a plan to move thousands of people out of its path.  A few weeks after his return to Italy, Barberi received a letter from the Columbian authorities thanking him for his proposals which they had not yet implemented. The letter arrived one week after the volcano erupted. Rescue teams were able to save some people, but thousands more perished.	Barberi's sobering personal experience fuels his drive to protect Greater Naples from non one, but two, menacing volcanic regions
  Vesuvius and the Phlegraean Fields. He now spearheads a new emergency evacuation plan.  It is intended to protect the communities directly in the volcanos' line of fire. Under Barberi's leadership the Ministry for Civil Protection prepares for the worst.		Rising high above the South American continent, the Andes seem untouched by earthly struggles. But their pristine, ice-capped peaks are haunted by a dark secret
 a deadly mountaintop ritual. These frozen bodies—all children—date to the time of the Inca—the great civilization that ruled the Andes 500 years ago. How they died has remained shrouded in mystery. Now, a new kind of scientist—part scholar, part adventurer—is unlocking the secrets of the ancient mummies. Anthropologist Johan Reinhard has spent nearly two decades exploring Andean peaks.		Today, Johan begins a climb to the top of Sara Sara, a giant volcano in southern Peru. When he first climbed the mountain in 1983, Johan found the ruins of ancient walls on the summit. He hoped to excavate the site, but never got the chance. Violent weather and terrorism prevented his return for more than 13 years. Now that the strife has subsided, Johan is mounting an expedition to Sara Sara, along with a team of Peruvian archaeologists. Joining them are residents of Quilcata, the town at the base of the mountain. Like their Inca ancestors, the villagers believe that Sara Sara has supernatural powers. The mountains are held to govern the weather, commanding the course of the clouds and bringing life-giving rain. If the mountain god fails to provide, disaster will follow. But was the Incas' fear of these deities so great, they would sacrifice their children to appease them? The Incas had no written language, so much of what we know about them comes from chronicles written by the Spanish who conquered the Inca Empire in the 16th century. These rare drawings depicting Inca life are the work of a descendant of Inca nobility who grew up under Spanish rule. When the conquistadors landed in 1532, the Incas were at the height of their power. Their kingdom, stretching from Ecuador to Chile, rivaled the size of the Roman Empire. Like the Romans, the Incas were innovative engineers. Undaunted by vertical terrain, they built majestic mountaintop retreats like Machu Picchu. Their distinctive, imperial style was everywhere, from their architecture, to their intricately woven fabrics. Bill Conklin is an Inca scholar specializing in textiles. He believes that one of the key ingredients in the Incas' success was their unique attitude toward conquest.		One ancient Andean tradition that the Incas embraced was mountain worship.		While still on the lower slopes of Sara Sara, Johan's team discovers evidence of ancient mountain worship. It's in a cave, thousands of feet below the summit.		The finds are intriguing, but they're not Inca. They were probably left by the Wari, a culture that flourished in Peru 500 years before the Inca. On his last trip, Johan saw Inca ruins 1000 feet higher up.		Sara Sara is over 150 miles south of Cuzco, the Inca capital, but according to a Spanish chronicle, it was among the most venerated mountains in the empire. Johan hopes the ruins will help him confirm the mountain's prominence.		Johan's partner on the expedition is Doctor Jose Antonio Chavez, an archeologist from the Catholic University in Arequipa.		The complex appears to be a huge staging area used by the Incas on their journeys up the mountain.		Johan's interest in Sara Sara was sparked in part by intriguing references in the Spanish Chronicles. But was Peru's past accurately portrayed in the invaders' accounts? Sonia Guillen is one of Peru's leading experts on mummified bodies. She has spent years studying the continents of exposed graves in the vast coastal desert of southern Peru. Like many other investigators, she is highly suspicious of the Spanish chronicles.		Accounts of one Inca ceremony in particular seemed exaggerated
 capa cocha—a mysterious ritual in which the Incas sacrificed their children to the mountain gods.		The descriptions were so grotesque, the scholars doubted the ceremony actually took place.		Deep in the bowels of a museum in Chile, a translucent coffin holds evidence that suggesting capa cocha was all too real. Found on a mountaintop in 1954, he's been locked in a freezer ever since. The frozen body of a young boy. He died 500 years ago—a child of the Inca. They named him the El Plomo boy, for the peak where he was discovered. Dr. Silvia Quevedo Kawasaki leads the team of conservationists which is struggling to keep the child as well preserved in the lab as he was in his icy tomb.		The El Plomo boy was well adorned with exquisite Inca textiles and jewelry, all perfectly preserved. Found with him was an array of artifacts, including small pouches containing his baby teeth and nail clippings. There was a gold llama, and a distinctive silver figurine. These were all classic Inca offerings to the gods. And so, it seems, was the boy. He was a capa cocha sacrifice.		A gentile death—in stark contrast to the Spaniards' gruesome descriptions. Now that actual evidence was emerging, Inca attitudes toward human sacrifice had to be thoroughly reexamined.		The children chosen for sacrifice were said to be perfect—In death, they would be deified.		The Spanish described in detail the ceremonies leading up to the sacrifice.		The frozen mountaintop preserved forever elements of the ceremony, including evidence of the child's long journey.		The summit of Sara Sara is a huge complex of man-made platforms, shaped by stone retaining walls and filled with gravel. Johan is standing on the lower of the two main terraces, visible only as stone circles above the snow. On the opposite northern side, a collection of boulders marks a small platform. To the east, a series of four terraces runs down between rocky outcrops. Johan believes the southern end holds the most promise.		Was this the last sight seen by a child 500 years ago? The Incas intended their offerings to last for eternity. But in less than 100 years, Catholic monks were retracing the children's footsteps with a very different aim.		The monks didn't merely record Inca traditions
 they also did their best to uproot them. They hunted down and destroyed anything sacred to the culture, including the bodies of capa cocha children.		Before digging, Johan's team makes a traditional offering to the mountain of llama fetuses.		On the summit, the mountain seems reluctant to yield its secrets. The team must chop through six feet of 500 year old gravel—now frozen rock hard. Every spare container is commandeered for boiling snow, to help soften the ground.		Hacking through the frozen gravel is exhausting labor. The air contains about half the oxygen found at sea level, so each worker can swing his pick only a few times before stopping to catch his breath.		But there's no need to imagine a find—in a matter of hours, Jose Antonio Chavez spots the real thing—A silver Inca shawl pin lying on the surface of the ground. Soon he finds five similar pins. None are buried.		Although this shows the site was used by the Incas, it could be bad news for the archaeologists. The Incas usually buried their offerings. Artifacts found on the surface often mean another sort of excavation has taken place. It's a problem afflicting every archaeological site in Peru, looters. An ancient cemetery near where Sonia Guillen works is a typical example.		The looters, also known as huaqeros, will go to any lengths to find capa cocha burials.		The threat of looting heightens the team's resolve to find and conserve Inca burial sites. But now it seems this site may disappoint them. After several fruitless days, Jose decides to give up digging on the north side. Johan perseveres, and at last, there's a glimmer of hope
 a layer of grass buried within the main, southern platform.		Grass and trees don't grow at this altitude, so they must have been carried up the mountain, probably by the Incas.		The site looks more promising, but not the weather. A fierce lightning storm suddenly sweeps over the summit. Everyone scrambles down to camp, 500 feet below. The storm is a sobering reminder of the violent forces that lurk about the mountain. It was this kind of power which struck fear into the hearts of the Incas—and moved them to appease the mountain gods with gifts. One of those gifts is kept here in a freezer in Argentina. The body of a young boy, one of only a handful of well-preserved capa cocha children ever found. He was discovered in 1985 on Mount Aconagua, the tallest peak in the Western Hemisphere. The top of his head was damaged by exposure, but the rest is almost perfectly preserved. Although the El Plomo boy from Chile appeared to have died peacefully, the final moments of the Aconcagua boy were different.		The clothes he was wearing were covered in vomit and diarrhea, both stained red by the achiote dye.		No one can know for certain what this young child felt in his final moments, but clearly, he was physically ill. Exhaustion and high altitude could have contributed to his nausea. But his death was far from natural. The seven-year old was so tightly wrapped in textiles that his ribs were broken, his pelvis dislocated. The life was literally squeezed out of him. Was this the norm for capa cocha? Were the Spanish right when they described a violent ritual? The discovery of Juanita provided new opportunities to investigate. Many of the tourists who visit Juanita comment on her calm, almost saint-like air. But during her trip to Washington, the mummy was CAT scanned by an advanced 3D imaging system at Johns Hopkins University. The test revealed a darker secret behind the serene expression.		Research on Juanita is just beginning. Scientists hope her internal organs, as well as the textiles and offerings found with her, will reveal more about what kind of life she led. DNA analysis of her frozen flesh may help determine what part of the Inca empire she came from. Juanita was a great discovery for Johan, yet something was missing, her tomb. Landslides on Mount Ampato destroyed her ceremonial burial place, and Juanita rolled 200 feet down the mountain. The perfect capa cocha burial; is yet to be found, and Johan suspects it may be hidden somewhere on Sara Sara. So far, there are no signs of the coveted ancient grave site. After five days, the team has found nothing more than the shawl pins. Then, an archaeological student, Walter Diaz, spots something in his small patch of gravel.		What Walter has found is a tiny silver statue wrapped in textiles, a classic capa cocha offering. As they clear the earth away, the workers find a second silver statue, a female, the same design as the one found with the El Plomo boy.		Sure enough, as Walter digs deeper, a gold figurine emerges from the soil.		Next is a figurine carved from a seashell, once as valuable to the Incas as gold.		Seashell miniatures, and gold and silver statuettes, were offered to the gods along with the capa cocha children. Although the shawl pins were found to the north, Walter's statues came out of a small rock crevice high on the summit.		Then, finally, a tantalizing find over the cover on the main platform. A small silver rod glints within the ice.		Johan hopes this tiny llama is a sign of more exciting things to come.		While the male and female statues were found in a crevice above the main platform, the silver llama was unearthed close to the stop where Johan expected to find a mummy. Hopes are high that more digging will reveal the focus of all the offerings, the body of a child. But as the days pass, only Walter's small rock crevice yields more artifacts, seven in all, including a beautiful gold male statue. The ice hole on the main platform is a disappointment. Hours of hacking and pouring hot water reveal nothing but more grass. Time on the mountain is running out. The team has been here for nine days. Supplies are low, and everyone is feeling the effects of the altitude. Desperate to make the most of what little time remains, team members launch small excavations all over the summit. Amazingly, one of them, on the eastern side, pays off.		The pungent stench of decomposing flesh attracts other team members. As Jose scrapes away the gravel, they find themselves staring into the face of a small mummy.		To Johan, the discovery is proof that the Incas used Sara-Sara for child sacrifice. The complete grave will help the archaeologists paint a clearer picture of this ancient ritual.  The mummy was buried in the terraces east of the main platform. Since these face the morning sun, the ground here is not frozen, and the body will most likely be degraded.  As the mud is removed, it's clear the whole bundle is wrapped in sac-like textiles.		Even though the caked mud, a glimmer of color is visible, fine stripes on 500 year old Inca cloth.		Just beneath the textiles is a clue to the child's sex.		Another girl who lost her life to the mountain gods. She was found just in time, the team can't afford to stay on the mountain any longer. But Johan is determined to return. He's convinced that Sara Sara harbors many more invaluable finds.		Still partly frozen and caked in the dirt, the mummy is carried down to the village below, where she is nicknamed "Sarita" after the great mountain which claimed her life. Back at the Catholic University in Arequipa, Jose Antonio Chavez leads the team of conservationalists who will care for the mummy. Their first step is to painstakingly thaw, separate, and refreeze several layers of textiles. As the team peels away the coverings, startling discoveries come to light. A large pouch made of feathers hangs down the girl's back. It probably contained the coca leaves. On the mountain, the archaeologists though the tiny body belonged to an eight or nine year old. Now, examination of her teeth show she was actually about fifteen. Unlike some of the other mummies, which were dressed in royal Inca garb, Sarita died wearing very ordinary, everyday clothing. Still, she was clearly a capa cocha sacrifice. X-rays of her skull reveal that, like Juanita, Sarita was killed by a severe blow to the head. Each new discovery is providing more information for anthropologists, as they struggle to untangle the dark mysteries of capa cocha. These were the chosen ones, offered up by their communities to please the emperor and the mountain gods. Laden with offerings, they journeyed to sacred peaks throughout the Inca empire. The children climbed higher than they had ever gone before, to windblown spires of ice and rock. There, where earth and heaven touch, they died.		On the edge of the millennium, Front Line takes on one of the epochal events of Western civilization.		Tonight on NOVA, sacrificial horses guard her tomb.  Gold and silk adorn her body.  For 24 centuries, she was frozen in time.  Was she a priestess?  A warrior chief?  NOVA unearths the secrets of "The Siberian Ice Maiden".		The thunder of hooves on the Siberian steppes echoes a legendary past. Mounted tribes once ruled these high plateaus, where towering stone monuments reach toward the heavens. Golden treasures from these days are rare and enigmatic.  But new finds cast light on  a culture cloaked in mystery
 Sacrificed animals, valued possessions, and a startling emissary from this age of warriors—a 2400 year old woman frozen in time. But this Ice Maiden will not be left to rest.  Removed from the grave, her body has traveled half way around the world to be displayed and admired. Now, she is returning to Siberia, back to the scientist who discovered her, and who hopes to learn more of the Ice Maiden's secrets.		Dating back to 1000 B.C., this burial ground is still sacred to people of the Altay today. It is a sacrilege to shout here for it might offend the spirits of the dead who lie here in tombs called kurgans, marked by mounds of earth and stone. Over the centuries, many of these burial mounds have been looted.  Finding an untouched tomb requires a stroke of luck.		The kurgan was just ten yards from a barbed-wire fence, just inside the strip of no-man's land between Russia and China.  The team first had to remove by hand the many hundreds of stones that covered the tomb.  Some were already scattered, a worrisome sign that the site had been pillaged.  Then, after weeks of careful digging, they hit paydirt
  A large intact wooden chamber that had flooded with water, now turned to ice.  Propped against the outer wall of the chamber were the frozen remains of six horses.  These animals, no doubt of great value in their time, all had been sacrificed.  The team could only imagine what other treasures might be preserved in the icy chamber itself.		There was reason for excitement.  Spectacular frozen tombs had been unearthed in this region before—but not in many decades.  Starting in the 1920's, Russian Archaeologist, Sergei Rodenko, launched a series of landmark excavations in Southern Siberia.  High in the mountains, he found great mounds of stone—both signifying grand burials and preserving them.  The stones allowed water to seep down, but deflected the heat of the sun. This, together with the long winters, kept the ground below permanently frozen.  Like Natalia Polosmak decades later, Rodenko unearthed sacrificed horses, and with them immaculately preserved cloth saddles, still soft after more than 2000 years.  Woolen rugs and other splendid objects had escaped the ravages of time.  They gave testament to the richness of this culture, and to its artistry.		The Pazyryk artifacts closely resembled those of tribes further West—the legendary warriors known as Scythians.		In the 5th Century B.C. the Scythian World stretched eastward from the Black Sea over the vast steps of Europe and Asia, right into the mountains of Siberia.  Though they left no written records, their exploits were chronicled by the Greek historical Herodotus.  He wrote of warriors so fierce they would drink from the skulls of their victims.  Such gruesome tales, told by a foreign observer, were long considered fiction. But archaeologists now see truth in much of his writing.		It was one of these very burials that Natalia Polosmak found in 1993.  The sacrificed horses outside of the burial chamber were just the start.  Within the chamber itself, the ice harbored other remarkable finds, including vessels still containing food after 24 centuries.  Helping the Russian archaeologists defrost the tomb was a young American student.		What they saw upon reaching the bottom of the chamber was worth every effort.  A coffin such as those found in the most elaborate Pazyryk burials.		Disturbing this sacred tomb high in the mountains made the archaeologists uneasy.		This anxiety peaked as they prepared to open the coffin.  A casket so grand they thought it might contain two people.		The water had long ago turned to ice, rock-solid and milky white, concealing the coffin's secrets.		What was hidden in the massive block of ice? As it melted, they caught tantalizing glimpses of precious adornments.  Flecks of gold glittered in the sun.  Then, finally, a face.  It was largely bone. But the rest of the body was covered with flesh.  And what of the coffin's grand size?  The astounding answer was found at the far end of the casket.  It was the distinctive headdress of a Pazyryk woman, since named the Ice Maiden.		She was buried alone—not a mistress or concubine—but a powerful figure in her own right.  The soft contours of her body had changed little since she was laid to rest in the 5th Century B.C.		The blanket she wore hid another surprise.		News of the tattooed woman quickly reached other archaeologists in the region, including Natalia's husband.		But there was little time for celebration. Removed from her frozen cocoon, the Ice Maiden began to decay.  Natalia tried to rush the body to safe storage, but the air lift was ill-fated.		Eventually, the Ice Maiden was delivered to Natalia's institute in Novosibirsk.  She was lodged in a freezer—an unceremonious home—but one which might stop her decay.		What actually killed her remains a mystery, but the hole in her skull was likely just part of her embalming.  The Ice Maiden's brain and other organs, which quickly rot, were removed soon after death.  The process echoed haunting tales written long ago by Herodotus.		Was this procedure the same for the Ice Maiden?  Biochemist, Werner Schoch, found that, in addition to fur and wool, her body was packed with natural preservatives.	The embalmers' craft also explained a macabre discovery, the Ice Maiden's eyes had been cut out and her eye sockets stuffed with fur.		Rudolph could also estimate the Ice Maiden's age.		For her afterlife, this young woman was beautifully dressed. She wore a 3 foot headdress made of felt, which took up a third of her coffin, and a necklace of wooden camels.  Other creatures adorn the headdress.  Among them, this mystical griffin.  All these carvings were originally coated in gold leaf.		This gold buckle, retrieved from another tomb, makes the symbolism even clearer. Here, a woman's headdress and branches of the tree of life are intertwined.		Few garments this ancient have been found so well preserved. The Ice Maiden's thigh-high riding boots were still supple and only mildly damaged.  Her dress, woven from sheeps wool and camel hair, was held at the waist by a braided cord with tassels.  It was banded in three colors—the red dye derived from insects, and delicate maroon edged this priceless sheer blouse.  Even after 2400 years in the tomb, the clothing needed remarkably little restoration.		Her blouse raised an intriguing puzzle.  It was made of silk, which no doubt came from another region.		How had a remote Siberian tribe obtain such exotic material?  In Switzerland, at an institute known for restoring ancient textiles, researchers examine the Ice Maiden's clothing.  They tried to determine where the silk for her blouse originated.  There are two types of silk.  One from domesticated silk worms, and the other from worms that live in the wild.  Domestic silk, when magnified, appears to have round fibers.		A link with India suggests that the Pazyryk trade routes stretched across vast areas of Asia.  The most valuable commodity the Pazyryk might have traded were top quality horses.  The importance of the horse to their own culture was immeasurable.  Caring for the herds probably forced them to lead semi-nomadic lives—like many people of the Altay today.  In the summer, these horsemen keep their herds in low-lying areas.  But come winter, they move to the cold high plateaus where strong winds sweep the ground of snow and animals can graze. A nomadic way of life is evident in artifacts found in the Ice Maiden's tomb, and recorded in these drawings by Natalia's team.  Outside the coffin was a vessel made of yak horn, and a wooden table still bearing mutton.		More mysterious objects hint at spiritual beliefs and rituals.  A small stone dish found at the end of the coffin contained seeds.  Similar dishes in other tombs held cannabis, also known as marijuana—confirming a practice described by Herodotus.		But under close inspection the seeds in the Ice Maiden's tomb turned out not to be cannabis.  They were coriander.		A cherished object had been carefully placed near the crook of the Ice Maiden's knees. Inside a red pouch lay an ornately decorated hand mirror.		As in other grand Pazyryk tombs, the Ice Maiden's coffin was carved from the trunk of a single larch tree.  The walls and roof of the burial chamber were built from larchwood planks.  Samples were sent to yet another lab where radio carbon offered estimates of the age of the wood and the burial itself.		450 B.C. is only a rough estimate, since the radio carbon test has a 50 year margin of error.  It could not discern a possible age difference between the coffin and the outer chamber.		When Werner Schoch explored the contents of the stomach, he came across an object that was much larger than the masticated grass.		Because the fly larva is only at this stage of growth for two weeks, Werner can tell the precise time of year when the burial occurred.		By this time of year, the ground of the high plateau is soft enough for digging.  The Ice Maiden may have died some months before, so coriander is needed to mask the smell of death.  Her first meal of the afterlife is placed beside her.  Six of her horses are felled and lowered into the grave.  The coffin is sealed as if for eternity.  But water seeps into the chamber.  By the first snows the tomb is frozen solid preserving the Ice Maiden for her fateful meeting with a woman of the 20th Century.		The mummified body that he unearthed was as remarkable as that of the Ice Maiden.  It was a young man who also died at about 25 years of age.  On his chest and back, he carried an elaborate tattoo of an elk, a symbol of power in Pazyryk culture.  As with the Ice Maiden, his skull and his body were carefully embalmed helping preserve him through the centuries.  The icy tomb had saved even his hair—twisted in two long braids which flowed to his waist.   			Lying next to this astounding 2400 year-old body was a cache of weapons.  They named him The Warrior.  The fiercest warriors in these tribes, according to Herodotus, weren't always men. Women too charged into battle.  He told of women archers who would even cut off a breast in order to draw their bow string better.		Another recently found burial seems to confirm at least part of the legend.  It contained the skeletons of a man and a woman each with weapons, arrowheads, and an ax.		The Ice Maiden had no weapons with her, so it's doubtful she was a warrior.  But her elaborate burial did suggest she was a woman of importance.  Now, removed from her grave, her fate lay in Natalia's hands.		And her feelings turn to alarm when Natalia found the Ice Maiden's freezer was faulty. Fungus was growing on her body and her tattoos were fading.  Another journey was launched.  The deteriorating body was rushed to Moscow.   			Soviet scientists were experts at preserving dead bodies, especially those of revered Communist leaders.  Now their techniques would be applied to the Ice Maiden.  The Soviet method entails soaking the body in a cocktail of chemicals over several months. This bath is said to preserve a body indefinitely.  The treatment halted the Ice Maiden's decline and saved her tattoos.		The deer imagery in Pazyryk tombs suggest the animal had spiritual significance.  From time to time, the Pazyryk even used elaborate masks to transform their horses into deer.  Perhaps tattoos on the Pazyryk's bodies were intended to transform them as well. Tattooing may have been an important initiation rite.  The pigment was made of soot.  It was applied with bone needles.  The Ice Maiden's largest tattoo—part deer, part horse, and part goat—may represent a supernatural hybrid—a creature that could climb the highest mountain peaks and even ascend to the pastures of heaven.		The storytellers who recount the Altay epics today have a long history in the region.  And performers, like this throat singer, are held in high regard.  The Ice Maiden may have played a similar part in her community.  But regardless of her role, donning her grand costume and beautiful adornment, she was surely an impressive figure.		Many who live in the Altay today, like historian Rima Eriknova, see the Ice Maiden as their ancestor.  They feel she should not have been taken away from her homeland.		The people of the Altay who gather at this festival to celebrate their heritage have reason to identify with the ancient Pazyryk.  Even into this century, they sacrificed horses when burying their dead.  A culture kinship to the Pazyryk is beyond question.  What isn't as clear is whether these modern people are biological descendants of the Ice Maiden's tribe.		But at the Altay Regional Museum, Director Rima Eriknova disagrees.		Many agree this face is too European. Comparing the Ice Maiden's skull to others, pathologist Rudolph Hauri drew another picture.		DNA is now being used to study the Pazyryk. At this lab, genes from ancient tissue are compared with genes from modern day groups.  Research with tissue from a number of burials suggests that the Pazyryk were ethnically diverse.  Within even one tribe, some individuals were more European, others more Mongolian.  Regardless of the genetics, the people of the Altay identify themselves with the ancient Pazyryk.  They are bound together by a homeland and a common culture.  They will always see the Ice Maiden as their ancestor.  And with political changes in this part of the world they now have the power to determine her fate.		The Ice Maiden's new home will be this museum.  But here in the Altay, some shudder at the thought of putting her on display.		The high plateau that was her resting place is now off limits to Russian archaeologists.		For Natalia, the Ukok is an ideal place to explore the past. But to others it remains a sacred burial ground, as spiritual today as it was 2400 years ago when with great ceremony a young woman was laid to rest.		On the edge of the millennium, Front Line takes on one of the epochal events of Western civilization.		Tonight on NOVA
High in the Alps, a figure emerges from the melting ice.  The oldest, most celebrated frozen mummy ever discovered. With a grass cape, a copper axe, a quiver full of arrows, after 5,000 years an all-new RETURN OF THE ICEMAN.	 	Major funding for NOVA is provided by The Park Foundation, dedicated to education and quality television.		This program is funded in part by Northwestern Mutual Life, which has been protecting families and businesses for generations.  Have you heard from The Quiet Company?  Northwestern Mutual Life.		And by Iomega, makers of personal storage solutions for your computer, so you can create more, share more, save more and do more of whatever it is you do. Iomega, because it's your stuff.		And by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and viewers like you.		More than 5,000 years ago a man set out on a journey into the Alps.  In these harsh reaches, fair turns to foul in the blink of an eye.  Beneath a mantle of snow and ice, the man perished.  His travels interrupted, his story lost.  But in 1991 his journey suddenly resumed. It had been the warmest summer in recent memory, and the Alps were unusually bare.  On the border between Austria and Italy, two hikers came across an unsettling sight
 a body melting out of the ice.  Suspecting a hiking accident, they alerted the owner of a nearby lodge.		A forensic team did not reach the site until days later. Ill-equipped to dig a body out of the ice, they used a ski-pole and an ice-axe borrowed from passing hikers.  It appeared to be a routine assignment, until a few curious objects surfaced
 a knife with a flint blade, and clumps of fur and grass. The find was growing more mysterious by the minute.		The body was rushed to the University of Innsbruck in Austria. By the time he arrived, the Iceman had become a sensation—a mute celebrity with an amazing story to tell.  Judging from a primitive metal-bladed axe found with the body, archaeologist Konrad Spindler estimated the mummy was about 4,000 years old—the oldest frozen body ever discovered.  News of the find swept the globe.		The discovery promised to shed new light on the obscure beginnings of European civilization.		Miraculously, ice had preserved not only the body, but the equipment the Iceman had with him when he died—ordinary possessions rendered priceless by time
 a bead with rawhide strings...two dried mushrooms on leather straps...finely stitched clothing made from animal skins...an unfinished bow taller than the Iceman himself...and remnants of a boot stuffed with grass still tied to one foot.  Excavation of the site a few  days later turned up more archaeological treasure
 a cape made of grass...and a nearly intact quiver still full of arrows.  But before scientists could begin their work, disaster struck.  The Iceman had to be hustled into a freezer in the basement of the university because he had thawed and fungus was growing on his skin.  Since then, the Iceman has rarely been removed from his icy quarters, and only for 30 minutes at a time.  Still, after years of work by an international team of scientists, a portrait of this mysterious time-traveler is finally emerging. The first question scientists had to tackle was the Iceman's age.  Could he really be 4,000 years old?  To find out, small samples of bone were removed for radiocarbon dating.  Like all living things, bone contains a form of carbon called carbon-14.  When an organism dies, that carbon begins to decay at a precise rate like a clock ticking away into eternity.  By measuring the amount of carbon-14 that remains in the body, scientists can calculate when the organism died.  Amazingly, the original age estimate was off my more than a thousand years.  The Iceman was a staggering 5,300 years old.  That placed him in the Late Stone Age—far earlier in time than anyone expected.  In movies, the Late Stone Age is usually portrayed as violent and primitive—unchanging for millions of years.  But the Iceman brings us face to face with the real Stone Age, a period of human evolution when our ancestors relied on stone for tools and weapons.  For much of the Stone Age, people subsisted by hunting and gathering.  They were constantly on the move, following the migrations of wild animals. But late in the Stone Age, or Neolithic, a revolution occurred. Agriculture took root and villages arose.  The Iceman lived iat the end of the Neolithic, just as metal was beginning to replace stone for tools and weapons. Archaeologists assumed that happened about 4,000 years ago in this region.  But the Iceman with his copper axe was 5,000 years old—proof that the transition from the Neolithic to the Copper Age happened much earlier than previously thought.  Within weeks of his discovery, the Iceman had become a local celebrity.  He was nicknamed Otzi for the region of the Alps where he had been found.  Now he was the subject of song as well as science.  But Fame had its price. There were rumors the Iceman had been castrated.  A special forensic examination had to be carried out to prove the Iceman was still intact.  The Iceman also became the subject of an international custody battle. It was only resolved when a team of surveyors determined that the body had not been found in Austria, but about 300 feet inside the Italian border.  After much negotiation, Austria agreed to return the body to Italy in three years.  With the Iceman's modern nationality settled, the mystery of where he came from 5,300 years earlier still lingered. So few Neolithic sites have been found in the area that archaeologists had little to go on. For clues to his origin, they turned to the raw materials he used for his belongings
 in particular, flint. Many prehistoric flint objects found in this part of Europe come from a region of Italy just south of the Alps.  Recently, Konrad Spindler led a dig here, to determine whether flint had been mined in this area in the Iceman's time.		Spindler was on the right track
 the similarity indicates that the Iceman's flint came from this region.  But this does not mean that the Iceman did too.		So the Alps were less of a barrier than previously thought.  But why was the Iceman here?  Where had he come from?  In search of more clues, scientists returned a year later to the site where the Iceman was found.  They melted all the snow in the area, filtering out more than 800 pounds of material.		Scientists at Innsbruck University's botanical department have been meticulously sifting and sorting this ancient debris. From even the tiniest scraps, the botanists have been able to draw startling conclusions about the Iceman.		An ancient form of wheat.  Unmistakable evidence of threshing. The Iceman had clearly been in contact with an agricultural community.  But where was that community? North or south of the Alps?  Among the material recovered from the site the botanists may have found the answer.		Some scientists believe these insights might lead them to the area where the Iceman once lived.		The ancient sites around Castle Juval are only five miles south of where the Iceman was found—close enough to have been his home.		The efforts of another team of scientific detectives confirm that the Iceman spent his life in this steep alpine terrain.		And the body holds more clues—strange marking on the skin—tattoos.		Painstakingly restored, the Iceman's equipment completes the picture of a man highly adapted to mountain living.  His waterproof grass cape—leather utility belt full of tools—even a lightweight frame backpack.		Life in the Iceman's time is vividly evoked for the public by archaeologists at this museum in Denmark.		By building replicas of traditional tools and learning how to use them these archaeologists fill in gaps in the record.  Reconstructions of the Iceman's arrows reveal an advanced understanding of ballistics and flight.		Equally unexpected was the great variety of wood the Iceman used to make his equipment—each kind still found in the Alps today.  Yew for the bow and axe handle, hazel for the backpack frame, larch for its supports, and ash for the dagger handle.		More evidence of the Iceman's skills was detected in strands of his hair found near the body.  By analyzing the different elements in the hair researchers are uncovering tantalizing details about the Iceman's life.		The Iceman's hair was covered in copper and on the inside, it contained arsenic levels today found only in people with chronic arsenic poisoning.  But could the hair have been contaminated by trace elements in the soil?  Absorbed as the Iceman froze?  To find out, the team did the same tests on deer hair from his equipment.		Do copper and arsenic in the hair mean the Iceman made the copper axe found with him? Copper was not known to be in use in the Alps as early as 5000 years ago.  So, archaeologists are exploring this region for evidence of ancient copper mining.		Copper ore suggests the site might have been a mine.  But other evidence nearby doesn't yield its secrets quite as readily.		What is the meaning of these bands carved into the rocks?		They learned that to make hammers out of these stones, they had to carve a groove around the rock to tie it to the handle. These may have been copper mining tools from the Iceman's time.		Mining copper is one thing;  making it into an axe-head is much more difficult.		This is a tricky business.  To get the fire hot enough takes plenty of air.  But too much air can spoil the entire process.		As copper melts, it releases arsenic vapor. Is this how the Iceman got the arsenic poisoning that showed up in his hair?  The final step in this process is to pour the copper into a mold.		Making an axe blade like the Iceman's is much easier using more up to date techniques.		Archaeologists turned to modern technology to produce replicas of the Iceman's axe that can be tested and studied.		But what did the Iceman actually do with his axe?  Copper is a very soft metal that dulls easily.  Archaeologists disagree over how useful the Iceman's copper axeblade really was.		These stone carvings, found in the Alps, hint at the broader significance of the Iceman's axe.		The carvings on these large stones seem to suggest that the Iceman's axe was more than just a simple tool.		From the moment the Iceman was found, the most enduring mystery has been what he was doing on top of a mountain.  The most plausible clues come from an ancient tradition still practiced today.  The Iceman was discovered at the end of a long valley that pushes north from the plains of Italy. Every spring local shepherds drive their flocks up this valley and over the high pass to summer pastures in the north.		The route the sheep take today passes far from where the Iceman was found, but this path was only carved in the last century with dynamite. The ancient route would have taken them right past his body.  The Iceman could well have been a shepherd who perished tending his flock.  This does not explain how he died, though.  In search of the answer to this question, scientists have poked and prodded every inch of the Iceman's body; inside and out.  This team is making a small incision in the torso to insert an endoscope. With this instrument, they extract tiny samples from his gut.  And learn that his last meal was meat and einkorn, the ancient form of wheat.  But researchers have been allowed to remove very few pieces of the Iceman's organs.  Not nearly enough to satisfy scientific curiosity.  Undaunted, they have had to find other ways of studying the Iceman without damaging his body.  One of the Iceman's fingernails, which had fallen off in the ice, was analyzed for clues to the cause of his demise.		Some scientists wonder whether the Iceman's mushrooms on leather strings indicate he was fighting some kind of disease.		Still more evidence of health problems emerged in x-rays of the Iceman's body.		The Iceman's hardened arteries turned out to be less surprising after tiny pieces of his bones were analyzed.		The discovery of broken ribs presents another tantalizing scenario.		The Iceman's hardened arteries turned out to be less surprising after tiny pieces of his bones were analyzed.		The discovery of broken ribs presents another tantalizing scenario.		If they could study the fractures more thoroughly scientists could learn more about they occurred.		Luckily, some of the most advanced techniques for examining a body are the least invasive. Recently, 5000 CAT scans were combined to produce a computerized three-dimensional image of Iceman. Immediately, this raised new questions about the Iceman's last moments.		Or perhaps there was no stroke, and the Iceman was simply a victim of the harsh alpine weather.		Maybe the Iceman also got lost in the fog on a journey into the high mountains.		Five thousand three hundred years after the Iceman took his last breath, he was on the move again.  In early 1998, Austria turned the body over to Italy.  In keeping with his celebrity, the Iceman had an armored truck and military escort for his final trip over the Alps.  The Iceman's long journey finally ended in the Northern Italian town of Bolzano, just a few miles from where scientists think he once lived.  The Italians have waited years for the Iceman to come home.  They spent 10 million dollars on a special museum and gave him a hero's welcome.  And it is here in this museum that the Iceman has found his final resting place.  In a custom-built, climate-controlled freezer, he will be preserved for science and displayed to the curious public.  But the Iceman will always be more than just a tourist attraction.		We can tell the story by looking at the way the earliest Christians thought about Jesus.	The full horror of fire can be understood only by those who escape with their lives.  Time after time, the same deadly mistakes are made as victims underestimate the speed of fire.  They become disoriented in thick, blinding smoke, or suffocate on choking, toxic fumes.  Firefighters have battled this savage enemy for centuries, requiring an increasingly sophisticated arsenal of weapons.  But the towering skyscrapers of the 20th century have outstripped even the most modern firefighting technology.  Today, the best way to defeat fire is to prevent it.  We expect public places we frequent to be fire safe, like London's King's Cross Station.  This is the ticket hall of one of Britain's busiest traveled gateways.  It houses five subway and three railway lines.  Today, it is outfitted with modern fire prevention technology.  But it wasn't always that way.  When thousands of commuters passed through King's Cross Station in November 1987, they had no idea they were in any danger.  The fire started small, a careless act on the Picadilly line escalator.   One of six escalators in the station, it was made almost entirely of wood.  Underneath, years of grease and accumulated debris ignited.	Hidden under the Picadilly line escalator, the fire continued to grow.  But rush hour crowds still poured into the station.  Upstairs, a young musician named Ron Lipsius found nothing out of the ordinary.	Blocked from the Picadilly line escalator and unaware of the fire, Ron decided to take the nearby Victoria line.  He waited on the platform for a train.  Several precious minutes would go before he was advised to leave. Nearing the top of the Victoria line escalator, Ron began to realize that something was dreadfully wrong.	Suddenly, the fire bolted up the Picadilly line escalator and exploded into the ticket hall.  It was flashover, the worst possible moment in a fire, when everything combustible suddenly bursts into flame.  King's Cross Station had become an underground inferno.	Knocked down and badly burned, Ron somehow survived.  But he was in mortal danger.	Upstairs, the casualties were mounting.	Still downstairs and stumbling around, Ron was fighting for his life. Then, the miracle, as he calls it, happened.	Once outside, Ron collapsed on the street and was rushed into an ambulance.  He spent weeks in the hospital, and years recovering from his burns.  Since then, Ron has had dozens of operations to regain function in his hands.  Before the fire, Ron was building a career as a guitarist.  He can no longer play the guitar, but he still writes music, and he considers himself lucky - he escaped.  Thirty-one people died in one of the worst fires in British history.  But why?  It took months of sifting through the ruins to understand why this fire was so unusual - hotter, faster, and more ferocious than most.	After the fire, more than 150 changes were recommended throughout Britain's public transport system.  The wood escalators have been replaced with stainless steel.  Underneath, the mechanisms are cleaned regularly, and automatic sprinklers have been installed.  Smoke and fire alarms are now in place, and smoking bans are strictly enforced - all lessons learned from the tragedy at King's Cross.  Throughout history, fire safety has come at a terrible cost.  And every innovation is a legacy of centuries of battle against this brutal enemy.  One of the first chapters in firefighting history was written 2,000 years ago in ancient Rome, where a brand new technology was in use - the pump.  It remains the single most important weapon in a firefighter's arsenal.  The well is filled by buckets and the pumping action propels a continuous stream of water right into the fire, closer than any human could get.  When Rome passed into history, the water pump was forgotten, and in the vast darkness of the next 1000 years, firefighting in Europe was reduced to prayer and superstition.  By the middle of the 17th century, London was wholly unprepared for the disaster it was about to experience
  a fire of such magnitude it would have consequences for centuries to come.	Spreading to the roof and fanned by a strong wind, the fire advanced rapidly.  As it moved away from the river, another of London's problems became all too apparent.	In the dark of night, the citizen firefighters had to break through the cobblestones.  With fire spreading all around them, they burrowed down to the wooden water pipes several feet below.  More precious time passed while they drilled a hole in the wood.  Finally, some water to fight the fire. Bucket chains were formed, sometimes hundreds of people passing leather pails from hand to hand until they reached the fire.  But all too often, the water would give out.  The pressure was very low, and the pipe system unfamiliar to these volunteers.  Sometimes, they would cut into the wood at the wrong spots, wasting water and running upstream areas dry.	A pitiful defense against a raging inferno.  But the biggest challenge they faced was to fight the fire where no squirt or bucket could reach.	London was in chaos, teeming with people desperately trying to save their possessions.	Dry conditions, strong winds, and the total lack of trained firefighters conspired to keep this fire burning.	The Great Fire of London destroyed three-fifths of the entire metropolitan area.  With their city in ruins, the people of London finally realized the only escape from the devastation of fire was to be prepared.  From the ashes of London, modern firefighting began.  New building codes were passed.  Wood and plaster were replaced by more fire-resistant brick.  Soon, a better water system went under construction.  Wooden mains were still used, but now, holes were pre-cut in them.  Removable plugs were placed in the hole.  And they were made long enough to reach above ground, marking, for the next fire, exactly where the water was.  This is the origin of the phrase "fire plug," what some people still call hydrants today.  But the Great Fire might have been very different with one of these.  A thousand years after Rome fell, the Dutch reinvented the pump.  While London burned, Amsterdam was protected by 60 manual pumps and hundreds of trained firefighters.  But there were drawbacks.  Their pumps had fixed nozzles.  The best they could do was aim the water at a window and hope that it reached the fire inside.  It took a 17th century Dutch painter, Jan van der Heyden, to revolutionize firefighting with an invention we all take for granted today
  the hose.  It was made of leather, and 50 feet of hose weighed about 100 pounds - without the water.  With the hose, Amsterdam's firefighters could get the water closer to the fire than was ever dreamed possible.  By the mid-19th century, manual pumps had grown very large, to cope with the dangerous fires of the industrial age.	Large groups of volunteer firefighters created other problems, especially in cities like Cincinnati, which competing immigrant populations.	The problem would be solved with the same technology that powered the industrial age
  steam.  A steam powered pump could dramatically reduce the number of men needed in the fire service.  In 1852, Cincinnati unveiled the first American-built steam powered fire engine—and the firefighters didn't like it at all.   Determined to get this new technology accepted, the City of Cincinnati held a public contest.  The steam engine, with its three operators, would compete against their best manual pump and a dozen of the strongest firefighters.  And may the best man, or machine, win.  For the firefighters, the steamer was a serious threat.	Determined to beat the steamer, the volunteers had an early advantage.  All they needed to do was connect the hose to the pumper, tap into the underground water well, and pump away.  With strong backs and a determined will, they quickly got a good stream of water going.  The steamer took much more time to get ready.  It needed to be hot enough to generate the steam that powered the pump.  But finally, it, too, produced a strong stream of water.  At best, the contest looked like a tie.  But time would catch up with the volunteers.  More than 20 minutes of strenuous pumping took its toll. Exhausted, they gave up the fight.  Now, the steamer really showed its stuff—not just one, but four streams of water, all equally strong, all from one engine.  And it would pump until the coal ran out, or the water.  Within a year, the City of Cincinnati would change its entire system of firefighting.	By the end of the 19th century, most cities in America and Europe were using horse-drawn steamers.  Ultimately, they were replaced by motorized fire engines.  This is the Cincinnati Fire Department today.  It is one of the busiest in the United States.  In the battle between man and fire, the goal has always been the same
  to get as much water onto the fire as fast as possible. Success usually depends on the technology available.  Today, the engine itself is a pump that carries hundreds of feet of hose, many ladders, and a vast array of equipment that often marks the difference between life and death.	They are even beginning to look like weapons.  The Cincinnati Fire Department is testing out this quick action water cannon that fires a fine mist at more than 300 miles an hour.  No hydrant hook-up is needed.  The mist gun is completely self-contained.  The small water tank provides enough ammunition for 35 shots, each one powered by a slug of compressed air.  This gun may be most useful when water is scarce.  One squirt has the same effect as 35 gallons of water from a conventional hose.	In order to survive this hostile environment and do their job, firefighters must be protected.  The first line of defense
  protective clothing.	Turn-out gear is designed and tested to keep the firefighter inside as cool as possible in temperatures that can soar well over 1,000 degrees.  It is also fire-resistant.  That is extremely important in situations like this
 a firefighter caught in a sudden explosion, fuel and fire sprayed all over him. Thanks to protective clothing, he only suffered a burn on his ear.	Without a supply of air, firefighters are unable to enter a burning building.	Even with air, there are many dangers inside which could incapacitate firefighters.  That's why they wear a device that can signal for help.	But perhaps the worst part about fighting a fire is the lack of visibility.  These firefighters are about to test a new piece of equipment that could help them see in the smokiest environment.	As the toxic cloud of smoke descends with deadly speed, everyone in this room is in mortal danger.	It's the smoke that kills in most cases, not the fire.  Within minutes, visibility in this room will be down to zero.  This is what a fire really looks like.  Unlike the movies, there is no flame lighting the way.  All is obscured by black, deadly smoke.  These are the conditions that firefighters walk into every day.  But this helmet has a camera attached to the brim that can penetrate the darkness.  Using thermal imaging technology, what it actually "sees" is heat.	Once inside, this firefighter can immediately see the white, hot flames of the fire on the left . . .	. . . and his colleagues searching along the wall.  But the victim is the other way, clearly visible with the helmet.	He can even guide his colleagues over to help in the rescue.	A couple of decades ago, this was secret military technology that helped illuminate targets at night.  Now, a life-saving device, there is one drawback
  Few fire departments can afford the $25,000 price tag.	In real emergencies, seconds can make the difference between life and death.  Today, Cincinnati averages about four minutes from the time the alarm is called in to the moment firefighters arrive on the scene.  But it wasn't always that way.  Modern fire communication began with the invention of the fire alarm box in Boston in 1852.  Hidden inside was a telegraph system.  When the lever was pulled, the number on the box was transmitted across town to fire alarm headquarters.  From there, it was sent on to the fire station nearest to the box.  At the station, the address of the box was identified, and the fire company was off, sliding down the newly invented fire pole.  In some stations, the alarm system triggered the stall doors to open automatically.  And the trained horses were harnessed within seconds.  Of course, the firefighters still didn't know exactly where the fire was.  If no one stayed by the alarm box, they would just have to drive around until they saw smoke or flame.  Over the years, fire alarms saved countless lives.  But there was one problem that some local fire departments went to great lengths to remedy.	Today, Cincinnati, like cities all over the world, uses telephones and computer systems to get to the fire fast.  All emergency calls in the City of Cincinnati come here first.	With enhanced 911, the address of the telephone automatically comes up on the screen.  But that's not always the address of the fire.	Now, the dispatcher goes to work.  His computer determines which fire station is available and nearest to the fire.  And the call goes out.	Fire does its worst damage in the first few minutes - before most fire departments arrive at the scene.  The solution to this problem is to build fire safety into buildings themselves, like this one in New York City.  In 1911, this building was a monument to fire safety.  Made of stone, steel, and masonry, it was considered fire-proof.  It even had a rudimentary fire alarm and a water supply on every floor.  When a small fire broke out on the eighth floor, everything went smoothly.  The Fire Department arrived quickly, and the fire, confined to two floors, was put out within 18 minutes.  It was indeed a firefighting success story - except for one thing.  The building was a death trap.  Garry Briese, Executive Director of the International Association of Fire Chiefs, visits the building that forever changed world-wide attitudes about fire.	As the workers got ready to leave for the day, no one noticed a small fire smoldering in a rag bin.  By the time they did, it was growing rapidly, fueled by oil from sewing machines and flammable materials.	But one of the exit doors was always locked to prevent the employees from taking breaks or stealing.  There were three other exits.  One led to a steep and dangerous staircase that was filling with smoke.  It quickly became unusable.	All that was left were two tiny elevators.	No stairs, no fire escape, and no elevators.  The remaining Triangle Shirtwaist workers were trapped.	One hundred and forty-six people died in the Triangle Shirtwaist fire.  Seventy more were badly injured.  It all happened in less than 20 minutes.	Every industrialized country has a Life Safety Code - requirements for building design and construction that protect human life in a fire.	We are surrounded by the legacy of tragedies past.  After a rash of apartment and hotel fires in the 1940s, fire escapes were mandated.  In this century alone, thousands of people have died in theater fires.  Today, most theaters are required to have numerous exits, and occupancy is strictly limited.	Fire alarms and sprinklers are also required, and curtains must be made of fire-resistant materials.  Sometimes, a single fire can have a profound effect.  In 1942, Boston's Coconut Grove nightclub was crowded.  Many of the customers were soldiers and sailors, celebrating their last days before shipping out to war.  Exactly how the fire started is still in question, but there is no doubt about the tragedy that ensued.   The ceiling was decorated with a highly flammable fabric.  Fire and toxic smoke filled the room in seconds.	Hundreds of people became trapped in this burning inferno, crushed up against doors that opened inward.  Other exits were completely sealed off.	Four hundred and ninety-two people died in less than 15 minutes.  The injured lined the hallways of Boston's hospitals.  Officials collected bodies for hours.  Personal belongings were gathered in piles, and unclaimed cars were towed away for days.  It remains the worst nightclub disaster in American history.	Today's cities reach to the heavens.  But it is buildings like this that pose the greatest danger for the occupants and the greatest challenge to firefighters.  Some of the most horrifying fires have occurred in the high rise buildings that tower over our cities.  One of the worst, the Joelmo Office Building in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 1974.  It started on the 15th floor.  The stairwells filled quickly with smoke and flames.  The heat was so intense that the helicopters could not land on the roof.  Ladders could not reach the trapped victims.  For some, there was no choice.  One hundred seventy-nine people died - the greatest loss of life in any high-rise fire.  The firefighting challenges posed by the high-rise buildings were graphically illustrated in this Philadelphia building.  In 1991, a fire broke out on the 22nd floor.  The only luck in this fire was that the building was empty. Everything else that could go wrong, did.	The water pressure problem would not be solved for more than ten hours.  In that time, three firefighters lost their way in the smoke, ran out of air, and died.	On the 30th floor, their luck turned.  A few floors at the top had been retrofitted with sprinklers.	There has never been a multiple death in a properly sprinklered building.  Yet only 40% of high-rise buildings have them—less than 2% of homes.  The surprising thing is that the technology has been around for almost 200 years.  Sprinklers date back to 1812, when British inventor Sir William Congreve patented the forerunner of the modern sprinkler system.  He arranged a series of perforated pipes along the ceiling.  Valves outside the building controlled water flow to the pipes.  That meant that fire had to be big enough to attract notice.  Fifty years later, a piano maker would come up with the automatic sprinkler.  Unaware of Congreve, Henry Parmalee long feared what a fire could do to his Connecticut piano factory.  He would not only solve that problem, but create a new business for himself.  Parmalee placed a cover over a small piece of pipe.  The genius behind this idea was that the solder he used would melt at 155 degrees.  Then, he attached the assembly to a pipe that was directly connected to a water supply.  To protect the entire area, he spaced a series of pipes several feet apart along the ceiling of his factory.  When the temperature at the sprinkler head reached 155 degrees, the solder would melt. Although today's sprinklers are more efficient, the basic technology is still the same as Henry Parmalee's invention almost 150 years ago.  Sprinklers would probably have made quick work of this 1993 fire in Basingstoke, England.  But none had been installed because engineers believed this five-year-old building would itself prevent fire from spreading.	And it worked - for a while.  The fire was initially contained on the eighth floor.  But there was one thing the designers didn't plan on.	It was an expensive lesson that none of the building designers predicted.  To understand this unusual fire, the University of Greenwich rebuilt the exterior of the Basingstoke building in its computers.	To solve the problem, Ed Galea drew in some ledges, or protrusions, over the window.  On the far right, the one-meter ledge is big enough to deflect the flame.  Although some of the hot gases cling to the building, the temperature stays low and the fire won't spread from the outside.	Computer modeling holds promise for safer building design, although even Ed Galea warns that computers can't solve all fire problems.	Escape from a fire demands more than good design.  It also requires understanding people.  This became painfully obvious in Bradford, England when, in the middle of televised soccer game, a small fire started in the debris under the stands.	Very soon, the heat and flames became unbearable.	Fifty-three people died, mostly because they waited too long to escape.  But why didn't they recognize the danger?	To save lives, human behavior must be taken into account in modern building design.  And that is exactly what this computer model does.  Each one of these virtual "people" is given physical attributes
  age, weight, strength, and so on.  And they are also given psychological traits
  drive, intelligence, and ambition.	The goal is to learn the lesson before tragedy strikes.  Maybe in the future, more fire victims will die in computers than in their homes and offices.  But until then, surviving a fire involves knowledge and preparation. Garry Briese knows better than most that no building is fireproof.  For him, fire safety is a routine part of everyday life.	The most important thing to know is where the exits are in case an emergency does happen.  Garry walks the route as soon as he is settled in his room.	Every day, more than 100 people die in car accidents.  This one is in Memphis, Tennessee.	In one dreadful moment, three lives have been shattered.  Two of these victims will not survive the trip to the hospital.  In the last 100 years, more Americans have died in car crashes than in all the wars the United States has ever fought.  Is there a way to make these devastating accidents survivable?  This is Germany's infamous highway system, the autobahn.  For long stretches, there is no speed limit.  Some cars cruise at 100 miles an hour, and faster.  Occasionally, German police cameras monitor the roads.  Most of the time, traffic flows in predictable patterns.  But recently, the cameras recorded a shocking event.  As shown on this small screen in the lower right, a Mercedes in the oncoming lane is about to round the far corner, traveling almost 150 miles an hour.  Playing back the tape, the police were able to see exactly what happened.  The car was going too fast to make the turn.  It grazed the guard rail on the right, and the driver lost control.  After sliding 400 feet upside down, the car comes to a stop on the embankment, and the removable top flies off.  Clearly, a horrifying accident, but what happens next is almost unbelievable.  The driver climbs out - not only alive, but uninjured!  A lucky man, certainly, but he also owes a large debt of gratitude to modern engineering.	As the car tilts, sensors trigger the rollover to pop up, creating a space between the driver's head and the pavement.  Wearing a seatbelt is crucial to keep the occupant inside.  Before the rollover bar was introduced in 1986, this kind of accident was unsurvivable.  In the last 30 years, science and engineering have helped created much safer cars.  Today, no new model hits the showroom without being rammed into walls, barriers, and other automobiles - to comply with international standards of safety.  But it wasn't always this way.  Automobile safety came slowly, and at the expense of millions of lives. This is a 1929 Chevrolet, crash tested using today's standards.	Survival in one of these "motorized coffins" was due mostly to luck, and the fact that cars were slow and scarce.  The automobile age began in Germany.  Powered by a combustion engine, the first car was built by Karl Benz in 1886.  For years, the automobile was considered a toy in Europe, meant only for the very rich.  It was an entirely different story in America.  Soon after the turn of the century, low-cost automobiles went on the market and Americans bought them in staggering numbers -even if the roads weren't always ready for them!  As the number of cars increased, so did accidents.  By the early 1920s, more than half a million people had died in collisions.  Yet, nobody blamed the automobile.  Accidents were considered an act of God - or, a bad driver.	Auto makers avoided the topic of car safety.  Sales could be hurt if customers began to think of cars as dangerous machines.  There was, however, one aspect of car design so lethal everyone recognized the need to change it - plate glass windows.  A minor collision, even a small rock tossed up by a passing vehicle could shatter a windshield, sending razor-sharp shards of glass inside.  In 1910, a laboratory accident would lead to a major advance in glass safety when Edouard Benedictus, a French chemist, knocked a flask on the floor. To his amazement, the bottle broke, but didn't shatter, because it was coated with nitrocellulose which had dried out, leaving an adhesive film on the inside.  Benedictus didn't think much about the incident until he read of an auto accident in which a young girl's face was disfigured by flying glass. Moved by the reports, he went back to his lab.  The result was a sheet of celluloid adhesive between two pieces of glass.  Bonded together, they made one clear pane, the middle layer holding the lethal pieces in place.  An improved form was first used in gas masks during World War I.  But it took 16 years and an accident to get safety glass used in cars.	Safety glass was considered such an important advance, car companies even advertised it.	Used in front windshields for almost 40 years, safety glass was an improvement - although far from perfect.  This, called the "glass necklace," was the unforeseen consequence of safety glass - graphically described in this film from the 1960s.	The glass necklace caused serious lacerations of the neck and head, sometimes even decapitation.  A glass more resistant to breakage was needed, but it couldn't be made so hard that an impact would cause serious neck and brain injuries.  The answer was to replace the adhesive with a middle layer of plastic that would stretch but not break.  But in most cars, glass-plastic is only installed in the front windshield, increasing the danger of ejection in side impact accidents.  By the mid 1920s, there were 22 million cars on American roads.  The initial demand for automobiles had been satisfied and sales were in a slump.  To spur the market, General Motors instituted the annual model change.	Dazzled by the new styles, most of the car-buying public ignored the carnage on the roads.  One accident at a time, cars were taking tens of thousands of lives every year and injuring millions.  There was one Detroit physician fully aware of the problem.  Plastic surgeon Claire Straith spent most of his time repairing the faces of crash victims.	Even in minor accidents, serious injuries would result when the human body met up with the car's interior.  Protruding knobs could rupture an eye or sever a nose.  Rock-hard dashboards fractured skulls and caused debilitating, crushing injuries.  Claire Straith's granddaughter, Janet Straith Husband.	Dr. Straith came up with a simple idea that could prevent such horrible injuries.	Claire Straith designed numerous pads to fit all different makes and models of cars, and tried to market his invention.  But it was never a commercial success.	The 1937 Dodge was a direct result of Claire Straith's talk with Walter Chrysler.  It had a safety smooth dashboard with knobs that were recessed.  The dash was raised to prevent knee injuries, and the front seat back was padded to protect passengers in the rear.  The 1937 Dodge was an improvement, but it had little influence on the auto industry as a whole. Safety would not be its focus for many years.	Hugh DeHaven's interest in safety began with a plane crash during World War I.  He was engaged in a practice dogfight and both planes went down. The other pilot walked away, but DeHaven spent months in the hospital wondering why he alone was so badly injured.  That question became DeHaven's life's work, and that of his friend and colleague, Colonel John Stapp.	In 1954, more than 35 years after his plane crash, a documentary about DeHaven's work at Cornell University aired on CBS.	The scientists at Cornell studied the forces that injure the human body.  To obtain measurements, they bounced plastic heads on dashboards and dropped tin men onto knobs.  They even studied some human oddities, like the story of Louis Zito, who lost his balance while working on top of this smokestack and fell 15 stories down.	Luck, certainly, but science had a lot to do with Zito's amazing survival.  Hugh DeHaven analyzed the plunge.	At that speed, Zito should have died on impact.  What interested DeHaven was why he didn't.	Zito's survival proved that even severe impact forces can be reduced with padding.  But that kind?  And how much?  To test different materials, DeHaven's team used the most fragile object they could think of (an egg), and dropped it 15 feet down.  The materials developed at Cornell would eventually find their way into automobiles.  But DeHaven knew that padding wouldn't solve all the problems.  And he proved it with some of the earliest crash tests on record.	With crash tests, they would prove the central foundation of DeHaven's work, that for every accident, there are really two collisions.  The first one occurs when the car crashes into an object.	The second one, when unrestrained occupants inside the car collide with the dashboard, windshield, or even the back seat.	It's the second collision that kills and injures, and Hugh DeHaven knew the best way to prevent it
  seatbelts.	The occupant is safely held in place, riding down the impact forces. As a result of Hugh DeHaven's studies and his relentless advocacy of seatbelts, auto makers began to offer them in cars in 1955 - not as standard equipment, but as an option.  Called lap belts, or two-point belts because they attached to the car frame at two points, they were an important improvement in safety. But they weren't perfect.  Head injuries, while less severe, still occurred. Spinal injuries were possible.  And sometimes, when the belt was placed too far above the hips, serious abdominal injuries could result.  In the 1950s, aware of the problem with lap belts, Volvo tried a diagonal belt that went across the chest.  But it, too, had some fatal flaws.  Retired safety engineer, Nils Bohlin.	Nils Bohlin would come up with a solution, simple, but very effective.  He demonstrates using the same prop that DeHaven used some years earlier—first, without a belt.	The three-point lap-shoulder belt worked because it restrained the two strongest parts of the body, the hips and the chest, with a single belt that was anchored by three connections to the car frame.	Nils Bohlin holds the patent for the single most effective safety device in any vehicle.  First installed in the 1959 Volvo, it took more than a decade for three-point seatbelts to be required in American cars.  That same year, Bela Berenyi, an engineer at Mercedes, came up with a safety concept that would completely change how cars were designed and built.  Before Berenyi, people believed the more rigid the body, the safer the car.  But such construction was deadly to passengers because all the impact forces went straight inside the vehicle.	Bela Berenyi recognized that if the front end and back end were built to crumple, most of the impact forces would be absorbed by the outside of the car before they reached the occupants.  And, if the occupant area were surrounded by a rigid frame, it could minimize intrusion from the crumpling members.	This is Berenyi's concept in action.  The damage to the car is severe, but the passenger space remains intact.  The secret to this design lies deep within the car frame.  Marked in red, the skeletal members are carefully designed and made of special materials that crumple in predictable ways.	First introduced in 1959, crumple zones with rigid cabs are now the standard in every car made throughout the world—although some cars perform better than others.  The only way to determine whether a car meets safety standards is to crash it, and then see what injuries the occupant has sustained.  That is where anthropometric dummies come in.  At about $100,000 each, dummies are as expensive as they are technically complex.  Still, scientists crash, smash, and abuse them in hundreds of different ways.  Each body part is made separately and designed to be as close to human as possible. Plastic skin is poured into a mold.  This one will become a knee.  An inner layer of flesh is extruded into the mold as well.  All the body parts weigh the same as they would in a comparably-sized person.  And the skin is wrapped around steel bones with joints that move smoothly.	Every car maker has a large collection of dummies - full-sized males, small females, even different sized children.  For every crash test, they are outfitted with dozens of sensors.  Wires connected to various parts of the dummies feed crash-impact data into waiting computers.  Small foils can be attached, that change color when pressure is applied.  And by matching the color, the severity of facial bone fracture can be determined.  Chest and rib injury can be detected by special sensors and then graphed on computers. Everywhere a human can be injured is measured, from neck stress to ankle flexion.  Dummies can't feel our pain.  But they can do a good job of measuring it, repeatedly and reliably.  It took almost half a century to create today's dummies.  In the 1950s, they weren't much more than mannequins.  One of the pioneering scientists in dummy development was Colonel John Stapp.  An Air Force doctor, Stapp was willing to undergo punishing speeds, and then suffer wrenching deceleration to gather the first crude measurements of the effect of crash forces on human beings.  His work was initially for aeronautic research, but it had universal applications.	Some tests were just too dangerous even for Stapp.  For those, he used cadavers and anesthetized animals.  The animal experiments would never be done today, but they did save lives.	Ford never did produce that steering wheel.  With the information he gathered, Colonel Stapp went on to write the first standards for anthropometric dummies, making animal experiments and human volunteers unnecessary.	But in the 1950s, safety still took a back seat to style.  Cars were becoming bigger and more powerful.  Speeding was such a problem, actor James Dean was asked to film a promotional spot.	A few weeks later, Dean died on a California road.  While the death rate soared, one accident in 1951 would inspire a safety idea so revolutionary that it took almost 30 years to show up in an automobile.  On a ride with his family, John Hetrick swerved to avoid a rock and landed into a ditch.	On the way home, Hetrick thought there should be something to stop people from hitting the dash or the windshield in a collision.	He thought of a cushion, a cloth cushion that would fill with air quickly when an accident occurred.	Almost a decade earlier, Hetrick worked in a Navy torpedo maintenance shop.  Torpedoes carried a charge of highly compressed air.  One day, an unusual event occurred.  The torpedo he was working on was covered with a canvas . . .	Inspired by a torpedo canvas, Hetrick's airbag was mechanical. Triggered by springs, the bag was filled by compressed air.  In 1952, John Hetrick was granted the first patent for an airbag.  Shortly after, he wrote to car makers and insurance companies, trying to market his new invention.  All but one letter went unanswered.	They wouldn't be interested in airbags for years to come.  But there was one car company that tried to break the mold.  In 1956, Ford introduced Detroit's first real effort at building a safer car.	Ford's so-called "Life Guard" design also included a padded dashboard and sun visors, seatbelts, and safety door latches.  And the company spent millions of dollars promoting it.  The only problem was, nobody wanted to buy it.	Styling sold cars.  And in 1960, this car captured the public's attention.  The new, sporty Chevy Corvair was exciting, and an instant hit.	Six years later, the Corvair shook the auto industry to its core, thanks to a young lawyer named Ralph Nader.	Nader's book, Unsafe at Any Speed, exposed many flaws in the Corvair's design, including the placement of the engine in the back, which created a rear wheel bias that could cause the Corvair to go out of control in a turn and flip over.	In 1966, President Johnson created the National Highway Safety Transportation Agency that would set standards of safety for all car makers to meet.	Soon, seatbelts were required in every car.  But getting people to use them was another matter.	But the ads didn't work.  In 1970, fewer than 15% of all Americans wore seatbelts.  The government called for a technological fix, a device that would restrain occupants in their seats, whether they liked it or not.  The race was on to develop the airbag, then considered to be the ultimate passive restraint.  It was a radical step; airbag deployments are violent events.  They use explosives to generate the gas needed to fill the bag.  And the bag itself deploys at 200 miles an hour.  Creating safe airbags was an enormous challenge. And there were several false steps.  Engineers had to determine how big the bag should be, what materials were best to use, and how to inflate them within 30 milliseconds after impact - without blowing them apart.  When the airbag deploys, some gas does seep out.  To be sure it wasn't toxic to humans, Mercedes carried out a series of tests.  The first ones involved putting a cage full of canaries in the automobile.	The canaries were unharmed by the gas, although they didn't like the noise airbags make when they deploy.  In fact, humans were also tested to ensure that they could withstand the explosion without hearing loss.  In 1980, Mercedes was the first to offer airbags as standard equipment.  Eight years later, all cars sold in the United States were required to have airbags.  And they are credited with saving thousands of lives.  But a darker side to the airbag story would soon emerge.	The car's speed at impact was about nine miles per hour, and the damage was minimal.  Both airbags deployed.  The boys in the back seat were fine, but Alison was limp and unconscious.	At the hospital, Rob learned that Alison had sustained a severe head injury and that she may be brain dead.	Alison died the next day.  Shortly after, her family discovered she was the 12th child killed by an airbag in a low-speed collision.  Injury can occur when the child's head is close to the airbag and struck in the first milliseconds of deployment.  Several children have been decapitated this way. Another type of injury is called catapult.	With other grieving families, Rob formed a group to force the auto industry to post a prominent warning about the dangers of airbags in all new cars.  The owners of older cars with passenger side bags received letters.	By the end of 1998, 48 adults had also been killed by airbags, mostly small women.	On/off switches are also available in some cars.  Although an airbag that is turned off won't kill anybody, it won't protect anyone, either.  Rob Sanders is a strong proponent of airbags.  But he is fighting hard for some basic changes in how they work.	But high technology may provide the ultimate solution
  an airbag system with a brain that decides for itself when and how the bag should deploy, based on certain criteria.   Under the seat is an electronic "scale" that directs the bag to deploy only if the rider is above a certain weight.  On the dash is an ultrasound sensor to determine the size and location of the person in the seat.  At the heart of the system, a computer.	The bag itself looks the same as today's systems, but can deploy at two different speeds.  This is the airbag module.  It is designed with a single canister that holds the gas that fills the bag.  On top, there are two initiators.  In a minor accident, only one initiator fires, and the bag inflates smaller and softer.  In a high-speed accident, both initiators fire, and the bag fills completely.  The third option is no deployment at all.  When an infant seat is placed in front of an airbag, the sensors recognize this dangerous situation and prevent the bag from opening.  Smart airbags won't show up in cars for several years, leaving in place a system that is life-saving for many, but decidedly unsafe for some.  After 100 years, cars are much safer than they have ever been.  But there is one thing that hasn't changed, the most dangerous threat of all
  the human behind the wheel.  Each year, 40,000 Americans die in car accidents.  Ninety percent are caused by human error.  The solution might be to take the human out of the driver's seat entirely.	And a computer can also drive a car.  This platoon of automobiles is completely controlled by computers.  The cars travel at 60 miles an hour, precisely 21 feet apart.  For ten days, this was the highway of the future, the two middle lanes of a seven-mile stretch of road in San Diego, built by a group of universities, private industry, and government.	A ride on the automated highway begins when the car takes over from the human.	Foot off the pedal, hands off the wheel, and leave the driving to the computer.	The magnets, in the center of the road, sense when a car is veering out of line and trigger the steering control to adjust.  Then, magnets themselves are small, buried an inch under the road.  They interact with three magnetometers attached under the front bumper.  There is a radar screen on the front and back of each vehicle that maintains a safe distance between the cars. And obstacles on the road are no problem.	What if something unexpected happens, like a breakdown?  Here, the automated truck detects the car ahead with plenty of time to change lanes.  But what would happen if the driver became ill?	But critics are skeptical that such a complex system can ever be truly reliable.	One of the goals of the automated highway system is to be collision-free.  But 2,000 pounds of steel hurtling across the landscape at 60 miles an hour is inherently dangerous, and as long as we choose to drive, we may never completely escape the risk.	An aircraft falls out of the sky.  For the military pilot, there is one last chance of escape.  For airline passengers, the only hope is to survive a crash landing.	There will always be aircraft accidents.  The problem is how to make them survivable.  Airline tragedies have forced engineers to confront the question of how to design planes to enable crash victims to escape with their lives.  The First World War introduced young aviators to the real dangers of aerial combat.  If their aircraft were hit, they had no means of escape.  On the Western front, the crews of observation balloons were in an even worse position.  Patrolling behind enemy lines, they were sitting targets.	Although the lives of hundreds of balloonists were saved, parachutes were thought to be unsuitable for airplane pilots.	Most pilots would have rather taken their chances with a parachute, even if they risked tangling it in a spinning aircraft.  But the generals feared pilots might be tempted to abandon their planes at the first whiff of danger.  Towards the end of the war, a German pilot was shot down, but managed to escape using a parachute attached to a can outside his aircraft.  The war was over by the time the Allies decided to install parachutes.  The idea of parachute escape was first conceived by Leonardo da Vinci.  Several Renaissance thinkers imagined it might save people from burning buildings.  But it would remain a paper idea for three centuries.  It works by the simple principle of counter-acting the downward force of gravity with the upward force of air resistance from the canopy.  The first public demonstration was in Paris in 1797, when a showman jettisoned his balloon and fell to earth on a parachute. Parachutes have always been associated with daredevil stunts.  In California, the public enjoyed spectacular air shows, which often ended with jumps.  But the parachute was still folded in a canister fixed to the plane.  One of the best known jumpers was a showman with the nickname "Sky High" Irvin.  He made his first jump from a balloon when he was 14, and had appeared in Hollywood movies.  By 23, he was one of the most experienced parachutists in America, and would be the guinea pig for a dangerous experimental jump.  In April, 1919, Irvin was selected by the Air Force to do a jump with the parachute strapped to his back instead of to the plane.  The folded chute would be ripped out of the canvas pack with a cord.  Many feared he might black out during the dive and not be able to pull the rip cord.  But the parachute's designer, Floyd Smith, who flew the plane, was confident.	This would be the world's first free-fall jump.  Would the acceleration be too much to bear?  Would he lose all sense of time, and delay pulling the rip cord too long?  Would the weight of his falling body be enough to pull open the chute?	Irvin capitalized on the success of his jump and set up the Irvin Parachute Company.  It soon became the largest parachute manufacturer in the world.  The military realized that parachutes were so reliable, they could be used not just for saving air crews, but for deploying troops.  And so, the paratrooper was born.  They would become the cavalry of the air.  Meanwhile, during the 30s, airline travel had become popular with the public.  It was far more dangerous than traveling by land or sea, yet if there was an emergency, passengers had no effective means of escape.	Aircraft designers began thinking of ingenious ways of getting passengers out of planes, like the trapdoor release, and the swing seat egress. One parachute company even made a promotional film to try to persuade airlines to provide parachutes for everyone.	In the days of propeller-powered aircraft, engine failure often caused accidents.	Mass parachute evacuation for airline passengers would remain a fantasy.	In reality, people not trained in parachute jumping risked serious injury, so the airlines never took up the idea.  In military planes, the parachute became the pilot's main hope of survival.  During the Second World War, it saved thousands of airmen's lives.  But as aircraft became faster, bailing out became more difficult.  Ground tests on a Spitfire showed the effects of wind blast, when a pilot tried to climb out of the cockpit.	Even if he could force himself out at such high speeds, he would risk smashing into the tail.  A new method of escape was needed.  Unknown to the Allies, in Germany, the Luftwaffe was already working on the problem.  Their new prototype jet could travel at over 500 miles per hour.  So, bailing out with a conventional parachute was impossible.  German scientists began trials to see how air crews might cope with sudden acceleration forces.  During an ejection, they would need to survive extreme air blasts.   Much of this work was carried out at a top secret research airfield at Rechlin, in what would become East Germany.  It was badly bombed in the final days of the war, and little remains today.  Returning for the first time in over 50 years, these men were all involved in high speed escape.  Theo Knacke is an engineer who left Germany after the war to work for the Air Force and NASA.  One of his first tasks was to design a parachute which would not be ripped apart at high speeds. His ingenious chute was made of silk ribbons.  They allowed the sudden blast of air to be released between the gaps.  After a few seconds, the weight of the falling pilot forced the ribbons to cling together, supporting his descent like a normal parachute.	But getting the pilot safely out of the cockpit was still a problem. The most important development to come out of Rechlin was the ejection seat. The seats were fired with compressed air using the same principle as an air gun.  Controlling the right amount of air was difficult.  If too much was used, the pilot's spine would be crushed.  One of the first to survive an ejection in battle was the Luftwaffe pilot, Otto Fries.	The Allies never built an ejection seat until after the war, when a small aircraft company in England grew to become the world's largest manufacturer.  The company, Martin Baker, was formed by an engineer named James Martin and a test pilot, Captain Val Baker.  Shortly after it was formed, Baker was killed flying one of Martin's prototypes.  So, the company stopped designing planes and began work on ejection seats.  The small family firm grew under the watchful eye of James Martin, who had a mission
  to save pilots' lives.	In the 1940s and early 50s, Martin Baker carried out some pioneering research on how to eject a pilot safely.  The pull-down blind protected his face from air blast, and ensured his elbows were tucked close to his body.  By using small explosive cartridges rather than compressed air, a much smaller shock was inflicted on the body.  The spine was only compressed briefly, reducing the risk of permanent damage.  This was a major improvement on the early German seats.  After several trial runs on dummies, they prepared for the first live ejection from an aircraft.  The guinea pig was to be a Martin Baker employee, Bernard Lynch.	Initially, pilots were wary of these explosive seats.  They did not like the idea of being human cannon balls.  But as more and more lives were saved by ejection seats, they were soon adopted by Air Forces throughout the world.  The unresolved question was just how much punishment the human body could take.	In the 1950s, a US Air Force Doctor, Colonel John Paul Stapp, volunteered to put his own body on the line.  His experiments on himself would measure the maximum forces a human being could withstand in an aircraft ejection or a plane crash.	There were some spectacular failures.  Luckily, most of them were on dummies.  Later, they used anesthetized chimpanzees to measure the effects of G-forces.  But chimps and dummies don't talk.  Stapp wanted subjects who could describe the experience.  And that was a problem, because he was usually the subject as well as the scientist.  So, he put in a request for a medical assistant.	Stapp was forced to use chimpanzees until eventually his boss was promoted.  Only then was he able to restore human test runs.	Stapp's most dangerous experiment was on a rocket-powered sled called Sonic Wind.  It would simulate ejection from a plane at supersonic speed.	Stapp had become the fastest man on earth, and proved the human frame was much tougher than anyone thought.  At the end of the 50s, he was asked to tackle a new problem.  The US Air Force was testing experimental rocket planes that could travel many times the speed of sound, and fly to the edge of space. These were dangerous missions, and the Air Force wanted to be sure their pilots could survive bailing out.  Preliminary tests on dummies showed that free-falling from such extreme altitudes would throw a pilot into a disastrous spin.  So, they developed a small drogue chute to stabilize the descent.  Now, Stapp wanted to know if a human being could survive the experience.  He needed a volunteer as bold as himself who was prepared to take the dummy's place. Stapp decided Joe Kittinger was the right man for the job.  He was an experienced skydiver and test pilot.  But no one had parachuted from altitudes where the air was so thin it was impossible to breathe, and the pressure so low that only a special suit would stop his body from exploding.  Kittinger would make his jump over the White Sands Missile Range in the New Mexico desert.  The launch vehicle for the mission would be a helium balloon.	The balloon rose steadily at 1,200 feet per minute.  After an hour, it was ascending through the upper reaches of the atmosphere.	Kittinger and Stapp persuaded the authorities to complete the real objective of the program
  to jump from the edge of space at over 100,000 feet.	But something did happen.  The glove on his right hand did not pressurize, so the blood began to pool, leaving his hand immobilized.	Joe Kittinger's record skydive still stands today.  He had demonstrated that it was possible to escape from planes even at the very edge of space.  But a new problem was emerging as military jets flew closer and closer to the ground to avoid enemy radar.  Most fatal accidents happened when they were too low to guarantee safe ejection.  So, the seats were fitted with rocket motors, which could propel the pilot up and away from danger, even when flying at ground level.  As Stapp's research had shown, it was theoretically possible to escape as almost any speed or altitude.  Today, at his old rocket sled track in New Mexico, engineers are about to test a new escape system. There will be no human volunteers on this run.  It's a dummy in the seat.  This prototype will be able to sense when a plane is about to crash.  On-board computers will automatically trigger an ejection, and control its trajectory from the doomed aircraft.  It could save a fighter pilot before he even realizes his life is in danger.  To test the prototype, they will fire it down a 10-mile rocket sled track at 500 miles per hour.	High speed cameras show what happens at the moment the ejection seat rockets ignite.  In a fraction of a second, the parachutes are deployed.  The dummy floats safely back to earth.  Whether pilots will entrust their lives to an ejection system that takes the decision to abandon the aircraft out of their hands remains to be seen.  As the technology of escape becomes more sophisticated, the chance of surviving an accident in a military jet increases. In civil aviation, the problems have been different.  The idea of passengers ejecting or parachuting out of a plane in mid-air was abandoned long ago. Research shifted to making crashes more survivable.  In 1965, the Federal Aviation Administration staged its first crash test.  This crash may look fatal, but many passengers would have survived.	The FAA investigators realized that the key to survival was getting passengers out of the cabin before it filled with smoke.  They used an old, crashed plane to conduct timed evacuation trials.  Clamoring out of the over-wing exits was cumbersome and slow.  Passengers had to help each other out.  As airliners became bigger, they needed more emergency exits.  These were often too high above the ground for passengers to jump to safety.  So, some aircraft were fitted with evacuation slides.	The early slides were made from canvas, and were difficult to deploy.	It would be hard to sort out this mess with a fire billowing outside.	Airlines began experimenting with escape slides in the 1950s.  The early slides required the crew to exit first and hold out the chute for escaping passengers.  Back then, when planes were smaller, they could be evacuated in two minutes.  Today, even though aircraft are much larger, the requirement is 90 seconds.  To speed up evacuation, all commercial airliners are fitted with self-inflating slides.	In 1971, an accident in San Francisco revealed that under some conditions, evacuation slides could be dangerous.  After an emergency landing, there was a small fire in the undercarriage.	A minor incident ended up injuring 27 people.  Since that accident, evacuation slides have been redesigned to be much more rigid.  These massive structures fully inflate in four and a half seconds.  They are made of flame-retardant material to help protect them from pools of burning fuel.  But it is not always possible to deploy evacuation slides.  In 1989, a DC-10 bound for Chicago went dangerously out of control after an engine explosion.	The plane was diverted to a small airfield in Sioux City.  It hit the runway so fast, the fuselage started to break up.	The extreme impact had torn the aircraft apart, leaving the main cabin upside down.  Amazingly, 184 people managed to escape.  But 112 died, most of them from head injuries, as they hurled to the front of the plane, still strapped to their seats.  Colonel Stapp's crash tests had proved that passengers could survive if they were properly restrained.  This test, conducted two months before the Sioux City crash, demonstrated that the seat and seat belt attachments could fail on impact.	The latest planes are fitted with much stronger seats.  But most aircraft still have seats like these.  In the Sioux City crash, passengers who survived the initial impact faced another danger.	Smoke can be even more dangerous than fire, as this crash test demonstrates.  As the remotely controlled airliner hit the ground, the fire retardant fuel being tested failed.  Cameras recorded what happened inside the cockpit and cabin when the plane was engulfed in fire.  Although flames briefly entered the broken fuselage, instruments recorded life-threatening levels of toxic smoke.	When plastic interiors and foam seats start to burn, poisonous fumes build up rapidly inside the cabin.  A few seconds delay in evacuating a plane can make the difference between life and death.  This accident in Manchester, England in 1985 left no doubts about the lethal effects of toxic smoke.  The plane, carrying 130 passengers, caught on fire during take-off.  During the emergency, one exit was blocked.  But the other three were open with escape chutes deployed.  There should have been enough time to evacuate everyone.  But 55 people died.  Most of them had collapsed after inhaling toxic smoke.  The entire airline industry was shocked by what should have been a survivable accident.	Helen Muir was asked to investigate by Britain's Civil Aviation Authority.  She set up a series of trials designed to induce the chaos of a real evacuation.  To do that, she offered a financial incentive to be the first off the plane.	The trials were conducted in an old airliner to see how different cabin layouts affected the flow of passengers.  This research video shows how bulkheads can cause blockages.  A recommendation was made that the opening be increased to 30 inches.	The researchers also experimented with different seat layouts and suggested widening the access to over-wing exits.  The openings were so narrow that people became jammed.  In this trial, firemen had to intervene to unblock the exit.  The findings were published.  But few major changes were made.	In Los Angeles, the USAir Boeing-737 crashed into a building, blocking half of its emergency exits.  Twenty of the 80 people on board were overcome by smoke and died before they could exit the plane.  Even in the wake of these accidents, the airline industry has resisted change.  Increasing the number of emergency exits means fewer seats - and fewer paying passengers. Muir has also focused on other ways of improving evacuation times without redesigning the planes.  The performance of cabin staff in an emergency can dramatically affect the number of survivors.	By aggressively directing, even pushing the passengers, the flight attendants can evacuate the aircraft much faster.  In a burning plane, this could save the lives of dozens of people.  In some trials, Helen Muir increases the realism by adding smoke and switching off the cabin lights.  This is how most crashes end up.	Researchers like John Paul Stapp have dedicated their lives to proving that crashes are survivable.  In military aviation, such knowledge helped pioneer extraordinary advances, enabling jet pilots to escape certain death.  In air travel, as in other forms of transport, accidents will continue to happen.  How to make them survivable is a question that continues to haunt aviation.	When a ship goes down in a storm, any survivors are at the mercy of an angry, unforgiving sea.	Within minutes of entering cold water, even the strongest swimmers struggle to stay alive.  Cold saps their strength, and the risk of drowning increases dramatically.  The harsh lessons of survival at sea have been learned from centuries of maritime accidents.  Improvements in life-saving equipment have increased the chance of survival.  But when disaster strikes, the sea remains a formidable foe.  The events that unfolded on this ill-fated ship illustrate the acute problems of survival at sea.  Like the Titanic. and Lusitania before her, the car ferry Estonia was the pride of the fleet.  Every day, she sailed across the Baltic Sea between Estonia and Sweden.  It was a busy route, and the car deck, just above sea level, was often full.  When she set off on September 27, 1994, there were almost 1,000 people on board.  Most of them were asleep in their cabins as the sea began to get rough.  A computerized reconstruction reveals what happened that night.  It was not a particularly bad storm, but  heavy seas battered the ship's bow door.  The pounding put stress on the opening mechanism, until the hinges snapped, and the bow door hung loose.  Shortly after 1
00 in the morning, it was forced open, and water began to pour into the car deck.  Officers on the bridge noticed the water on a video monitor, but they did not realize the imminent danger. Fifteen minutes after the hinges snapped, the bow door fell off, releasing the ramp.  The ship carried on at full speed for another minute.  Water flooded the car deck, and the Estonia began to list.  Eight minutes later, the crew put out a distress call.	There were no emergency instructions from the bridge.	When the ship turned over on its side, hundreds were trapped in their cabins.  Paul Barney clung to some pipes as the ceiling became a vertical wall.	He found a small group of passengers desperately trying to board a life raft at the other end of the sinking hull.	For the next few hours, Paul Barney clung to his life as others around him slipped into unconsciousness and drowned.  As long as ships have sailed the seas, lives have been in peril.  Centuries ago, in the days of wooden sailing ships, there were no lifeboats or life belts.  So, if a vessel foundered, the best way of staying afloat was to find some wooden wreckage. Sailing ships were often smashed on the rocks before shipwrecked sailors could be rescued.  This infamous stretch of Yorkshire coastline had over 700 shipwrecks each winter in the middle of the last century.  A new way of bringing stranded sailors safely ashore was needed.	The idea was to fire a cannon ball which carried a rescue line.  The problem was making sure the line didn't snap.  Sidney Alford, an explosives expert, follows the instructions of Captain Manby, the inventor.  He ties in a length of leather to absorb the initial shock of the explosion.	The mortar could shoot a life line several hundred yards out to sea. Once it was secured to the ship, the crew could be hauled to safety by volunteers on shore.  This kind of rescue saved thousands of seamen's lives every year.   Later, the mortar was replaced with a rocket, which had greater range and accuracy.  The rocket powered line was used well into this century. Each survivor was pulled to safety on a cork life belt attached to a pulley block called a "breeches buoy."  This equipment could only be used close to shore, or from another ship.  In the middle of the ocean, survival was a problem, particularly when ships were no longer made of wood.  When iron hulls were introduced, passengers were concerned for their safety.  If an iron ship sank, it went down quickly with little floating debris to cling to.  To allay their fears, enterprising Victorian inventors came up with some curious survival aids.  If the ship went down, a gentleman could always slip into his cabin trunk.  This specially adapted model was lined with cork to provide extra buoyancy, ensuring a safe paddle home.  In distress?  Then, why not mark the spot, so rescuers can find you?  A rubber suit, a paddle, and lifebuoy.  What more could a sinking passenger want?  The Mayday mouthpiece, ideal for projecting that urgent message to the loved one - if the gallant passenger can keep his head above the waves.  Thankfully, none of these inventions was tested in an emergency.  But the Victorians did come up with the first practical life preservers made of cork.  They were worn by lifeboat crews during rescues.  The cork lifejacket would keep a man afloat, but testing one reveals its limitations.  Dr. Frank Golden, a retired Admiral and pioneer in maritime survival, assesses the jacket.	But any lifejacket was better than nothing.  When this World War I battleship turned over, the survivors who made it to the deck slid down the hull into the sea.  Few wore lifejackets, and some of them could not swim.  If they were lucky, they might find a Carley Float, which they could cling to. These light, aluminum floats carried rations and first aid.  But they were no use if a person's strength was fading.  Thousands of seamen lost their lives in the cold waters of the Atlantic during the First and Second World Wars.  Airmen were more fortunate.  They were issued with Mae Wests.  The early ones had to be inflated by blowing into a tube.  They provided good buoyancy.  But they suffered from the same problem as all early lifejackets.  If the airmen became unconscious, they were almost certain to drown.	Dr. Edgar Pask was the guinea pig in a series of experiments where he came as close as he dared to drowning.	After these experiments, lifejackets were redesigned with a firm collar to support the head.  With a modern life jacket, it doesn't matter how a person enters the sea.  On surfacing, the head will always be held upright and clear of the water.	But even the most modern lifejackets would not have saved the crew of this ship, which set sail on its maiden voyage in 1912.	After disaster struck, hundreds of people plunged into the sea, because there was not enough room on the lifeboats.  The Titanic disaster alerted the world to the real danger of abandoning ship.  The sinking of the unsinkable ship made nations international safety regulations for the first time.  From then on, everyone traveling on a ship was guaranteed a place on a lifeboat and an approved lifejacket.  All ships were required to conduct lifeboat drills.  This was a simple procedure for an upright ship in calm water.  But in more extreme conditions, it could deteriorate into chaos. Twenty-two years after the Titanic, in 1934, the Morro Castle set sail from New York to Cuba, which was a popular cruise destination at the time.  It had a full complement of lifeboats, but the passengers were not taught how to use them.  The captain wanted everyone to enjoy the party atmosphere.  On the return journey, a small fire on the lower decks was allowed to get out of control.  As the Morro Castle approached New York, the order was given to abandon ship.  The crew had no idea how to organize an evacuation.  The plight of the passengers inspired a dramatization of the disaster.  One of the passengers, Dolly McTigue, was on her honeymoon with her husband, Sidney.	Many of the lifeboats were burned in the fire.  The rest were commandeered by the crew, who left the passengers to fend for themselves.	The four lifeboats that made it to the shore carried 119 crew members and only 15 passengers.  The code of the sea had been abandoned with the sinking ship.	The Morro Castle tragedy cost the lives of 124 people.  After an inquiry, the captain was prosecuted for negligence.  The disaster highlighted a number of problems.  The firefighting provisions were completely inadequate, with hydrants locked and hoses stored away.  The passengers had been given no safety drills.  And most important was the complete failure of the crew to deal with the emergency.  On this training ship, merchant marine cadets learn to prevent such disasters.  If there is a fire on board, a well-rehearsed emergency plan swings into action.  The sailors become firefighters and divide up into small teams to locate the source.  They learn how to use breathing apparatus to navigate through smoke.  If they can extinguish the fire quickly, it will avoid the need to pump large volumes of water which could flood the ship.  They are also trained to search through the ship's compartments for victims overcome by smoke.  If a fire should take hold, the worst case disaster scenario is to abandon ship. 	The only way of abandoning without major loss of life is to ensure everyone knows the drill.	Down in the engine room, the crew is particularly vulnerable. Automatic doors seal the ship into fireproof, watertight compartments.  If there is a fire on a lower deck, sailors can be trapped.  So, many ships have an escape tunnel that runs along the entire length of the propeller shaft.  A vertical chimney is their direct link to the top deck.	Not knowing where to go is a common problem.  On a well-organized ship, everyone reports to a muster station, where a roll call is carried out to ensure no one is missing.	Some of these cadets will become the cruise ship officers of the future.  One day, they may have to rescue passengers who are frightened and untrained in the ways of the sea.  But there are even more extreme situations. Escape from warships under enemy fire has its own set of rules.  For as well as saving lives, the crew must do everything possible to save the ship.  One of the most heroic examples of this was on board the aircraft carrier, USS Franklin.  It was bombed by Kamikaze pilots in the Second World War.  The ship's own bombs and ammunition started to explode, triggering massive fires. Most of the crew was evacuated, but damage control teams stayed on, battling the fire for five days, as the ship limped back across the Pacific.  Today, in Portsmouth, England, a simulator called the Hazard enables sailors to practice damage control without leaving the dock.  Working in a small compartment as the water level rises, they experience first-hand the terror of trying to prevent a flooding ship from sinking.  The hull is riddled with holes.  Their task is to stem each new leak.  This high-tech simulator mimics the motion of a ship taking on water.  High pressure water jets are triggered inside to simulate direct hits beneath the water line.  It's like a plumber's worst nightmare.  To combat the danger, the crew adopts a low-tech approach.  They use crude tools, wedges of wood, hammers and scaffolding braces.  Wood expands when it's wet, so by plugging each hole, the sailors can cut down the water flow.  They must work fast, because the water level in the compartment is almost up to their necks. As the interior continues to flood, the rocking of the simulator starts to slow down, just as it would on a real ship that is taking on water.  What determines the moment a ship sinks is an exact science.  A ship is most stable when it's able to right itself quickly.  Paradoxically, the quicker it rolls, the more stable it is.  This scale model of a destroyer enables Naval engineers to see what happens when different sections of the ship are flooded.	When that point is reached, disaster strikes quickly.  The Estonia sank at 1
40 in the morning, with most of the 980 passengers still trapped below decks.  There was not enough time to fill the lifeboats.  Only 137 people would survive the night.  Paul Barney was fighting for his life in his upturned raft.	Hypothermia is one of the biggest problems of survival at sea.  But it's scientific investigation has a tragic history, which began in the Second World War.  The German Luftwaffe was concerned by the number of pilots lost at sea.  Sometimes, they died of cold even after they were rescued.  It was this problem which led to a series of horrific experiments at the Dachau Concentration Camp.  Nazi doctors watched as their subjects slowly shivered to death.  The perpetrators of these unethical trials were later convicted of war crimes.  One of the few survivors was a Dutch prisoner called Post Uiterweer, who was 25 when he was ordered to strip and enter the freezing water.	Few of these Nazi experiments had any scientific value.  But they established that hot water was the best way of treating hypothermia.  They also found that human beings lose consciousness when the body temperature falls below 28 degrees.  What to do with this information became highly controversial, because at least 80 prisoners are thought to have died in these brutal experiments.  Cold water survival research since the war uses volunteers.  Royal Navy researchers filmed a series of demonstrations with British Olympic swimmers.	Another volunteer was submerged in water at five degrees Centigrade. The experiment was supposed to last five minutes.  But he could only withstand two and a half.  Paul Barney felt the onset of hypothermia start to jeopardize his ability to survive.	Even the most simple actions become impossible in cold water.	Staying alive after abandoning ship is hard enough.  But an even more extreme survival challenge is underwater escape - from a submarine.  Being entombed beneath the water with a limited supply of air has always been the submarine crew's greatest fear.	This German movie dramatizes Bauer's pedal-powered descent into the harbor.  Everything went well, until water started to leak through the hull. It rapidly sank 60 feet to the bottom.	But escape by flooding the entire vessel became impractical as submarines got larger, with more crew members to evacuate.  So, the Navy experimented with an airlock chamber that was flooded for each individual's escape.  The men were equipped with breathing apparatus for the ascent.  An inflatable bag was filled with oxygen from a small cylinder, allowing them to escape from depths of up to 200 feet.  In 1939, an accident aboard the USS Squalus caused the submarine to sink 240 feet to the ocean floor.  An open valve had allowed the engine room to flood.  To save the submarine, the crew sealed off the area, sacrificing 26 men on the other side.  The survivors feared they were too deep to risk escaping with a breathing apparatus.  Their only other hope was to wait to be rescued.  Along the East coast, an emergency operation was set in motion.  A ship carrying a new, untested McCann Rescue Chamber raced to the scene.  The submarine crew realized it was going to take at least 24 hours to arrive.  Carl Bryson and Danny Persico were both young sailors in their 20s.	A diver was lowered to attach guide wires, so the rescue chamber could descend to the escape hatch.	With the chamber locked to the submarine, the rescue could begin.	Danny and Carl were in the last group to be rescued.  After 34 hours on the bottom, they waited for the bell to return for the final trip.	The lifting cables had become entangled, so the men were trapped in the bell, halfway between the submarine and the ship.  The only way of saving them was to haul the bell up by hand.	The McCann Rescue Chamber was never used in an emergency again.  It was eventually replaced by an underwater rescue vehicle that could reach the greater depth of nuclear submarines.  This mini rescue sub rides piggy-back on a mother sub.  In an emergency, it travels to a disabled submarine, locks onto an escape hatch, and then ferries survivors from the stricken sub back to the mother sub.  So far, it has never been used in an emergency.  When accidents occur at shallow depths, there is a much easier way of escape.  In this water tank, British submarine crews learned the buoyant ascent method of escape. They wear a special suit filled with air.  After taking a few last breaths of compressed air, they zip up the suit and climb into a flooded escape chamber. The buoyancy of the suit guarantees a rapid ascent.	In a real escape, the survivor could face a long wait in the sea.  To protect him from hypothermia, the suit is heavily insulated, and also has an inflatable life raft.  It keeps him out of the water, cocooned from the cold. Life rafts are critical to prevent the rapid drop in body temperature common to all sea survivors.  At the Marine Training Center in Holland, oil workers and ship crews are trained how to use life rafts.  These men are wearing insulated suits, which increase survival times in cold water.  But clambering into a life raft, even when it's calm, can be difficult.  Most ships carry self-inflating life rafts, which can be deployed quickly.  But as Paul Barney discovered, they sometimes get turned upside down by wind or waves.	To overcome these problems, this ship was designed with a new way of evacuating people.  The HSS Stena Explorer is a high speed car ferry.  Although it can carry up to 1,500 passengers, this giant catamaran has no lifeboats.  In the event of an accident, the crew deploys enormous inflatable escape chutes. They are taking part in an evacuation test monitored by Britain's Marine Safety Agency.  Two hundred crew members must demonstrate they can evacuate the entire ship in under 18 minutes.  They slide down two 80-foot escape chutes to a floating platform which is linked to three enormous life rafts.  Each has a capacity of 135 people.  It is a daring concept to evacuate everyone from the ship - without getting their feet wet.  But it remains to be seen how untrained passengers would cope with the slides in 50-knot gales, or how these whale-like rafts would perform in a storm.  One of the toughest places to escape from is an oil rig at sea.  The risk of fire and the great height of the platforms make evacuation particularly difficult.  A solution to this problem came from a Dutch company called Verhoef.  Back in the 50s, Joost Verhoef started a small company, which would eventually produce a new form of lifeboat.	Aluminum had many advantages.  It was strong, light-weight, and fire-proof.  But Verhoef realized that to improve lifeboats, the launching system needed to be re-designed.	This goal would take longer to achieve.  Verhoef went ahead and built a full-scale prototype.  It was tested on the canal next to the factory.  A rich ship owner, who had lost two ships in heavy seas, funded the project, because he wanted safer lifeboats for his ships.  Over the next 25 years, Verhoef perfected the design.  If his lifeboat was to be used from oil platforms, he had to ensure that it could be launched from a great height.  He developed a pointed bow to reduce the impact on passengers as the boat hit the water.  By shifting the center of gravity and making the superstructure more buoyant, he achieved his final goal.	To demonstrate the extraordinary resilience of his lifeboat, Verhoef began rough sea trials on a scale model.  Despite the success of his trials, he could find no buyers.  He showed the boat could survive the biggest waves, was completely watertight, and could even withstand fire.	In 1984, Verhoef tested the boat to see how it might fare in a burning sea.  Five thousand liters of kerosene were ignited.  With the water spray system triggered, the boat was engulfed in flames for ten minutes.	The importance of this feature became clear in 1988, when the Piper Alpha oil platform exploded in the North Sea.  A huge fireball engulfed the rig, making it impossible to launch conventional lifeboats.  Many oil workers died jumping into the burning sea.  As a result of this disaster, the oil industry began to invest in a better solution.	Free-fall lifeboats have now been installed in many oil platforms and tankers.  Anyone who might have to use them is required to participate in test drills.  All passengers must be well strapped in for the big drop.  The free-fall lifeboat provides a rapid escape from danger for trained crews.  But it is not suitable for mass evacuation.  It would have been hard to deploy on a ship listing as fast as the Estonia.  Paul Barney's ordeal continued until first light, when helicopters began rescuing survivors.  Ten people on his life raft did not make it through the night.	He had survived the Baltic Sea through his sheer determination to live.   The horror of this tragedy prompted international action.  Today, ferries must provide automatic evacuation systems and life rafts that cannot be flipped in a storm.  The sea will always be an unforgiving environment, but the lessons from past disasters hold the key to our survival.	In the 12th century, in a Europe ravaged by war, famine and disease, the rich Italian city of Pisa rose above the horror by erecting the most magnificent Tower the world had ever seen.  800 years later this bold architectural dream has produced a nightmare.  Inch by inch, year by year, the Tower is slowly tipping over.  What was once an amusing tourist attraction is now a threat.  The top hangs 17 feet south of the base - and the Leaning Tower of Pisa is on the brink of disaster.	Pisa is shaken by several tremors each year.  If an earthquake rocks the ground, or a storm sweeps in from the nearby coast, one of the wonders of the world will be lost forever.  Can modern ingenuity prevent this nightmare and save Pisa?	Over the last decade, teams of engineers and scientists have been at work in the Italian city of Pisa.  A $20 million struggle to save the Leaning Tower is approaching a crucial stage.  Built 800 years ago to house the bells of the vast cathedral of the Piazza dei Miracoli, or Place of Miracles, the Leaning Tower of Pisa is one of the wonders of the world.  And one of Europe's top tourist attractions, with over six million visitors each year.  But the risk of collapse is now so high tourists are banned from entering the Tower. People still travel thousands of miles to steal a glimpse.  180 feet high, with columns, carvings and brickwork all of matching marble, even if it were straight this would be a breathtaking building.  There are almost 200 columns supporting the six stories of external arcades.  These walkways in the air must have been a thrilling experience for the medieval Pisans.  Even today the view is spectacular.  The infamous lean is not intentional.  The gravity defying five and a half degree tilt is a tragic flaw, that could eventually destroy the Tower.  Towers do collapse.  In 1989, in Pavia - a few hundred miles north of Pisa, a 14th century bell tower collapsed, killing four bystanders. Pavia's tower wasn't even leaning.  The Italian government reacted, and here in the shadow of Pisa's Tower, a Committee of experts has been assembled.  Nobody has refused this invitation.  Saving Pisa is the greatest prize in civil engineering.  Among the brilliant minds rising to this challenge are Giorgio Macchi of Pavia, and John Burland of Imperial College, London.	Burland, a soil engineer, digs into problems below ground, while Giorgio Macchi, a structural engineer, attacks weaknesses in the Tower itself.	Before the Committee intervenes, they must first investigate.  So many analytical devices are fixed to the Tower, it becomes the most monitored building in the world.  A circular sensor, which can register a vibration from a footstep, runs around the inner walls.  Metal clamps detect any shift in 25 of the Tower's largest cracks. Three plumb lines hang from the top level.  Taut cross wires measure deformations in the walls.  Some startling secrets are exposed - the Tower reacts to changes in the elements.  Every day the entire building sways in a minute circle not more than a 100th of an inch across.  This infra-red camera shows why.  The lens is sensitive to heat, which is displayed as white.  The sun heats the south side more than the north.  The marble there expands, creating an imbalance and increasing the lean.  At night it will shrink back.  Larger movements are recorded during rainstorms.	When the rain stops, the Tower will move back.  Committee member Carlo Viggiani has studied the Tower for 35 years.	The sensitivity to the water table suggests there is a problem in the ground below the Tower.  This will be an important part of the investigation. But first the Committee faces a more immediate danger.  Structural engineer Giorgio Macchi must deal with a series of massive flaws in the Tower's structure.  The Tower is a hollow cylinder, 45 feet across.  In most places the walls are nine feet thick.  But corkscrewing through the walls is a staircase wide enough for two Pisans to climb side by side.  This reduces the thickness of the walls to barely a yard in some places.  This would be just adequate if these walls were solid marble - as they appear to be.  But probes reveal otherwise.	Medieval masons often filled in walls with stones and lime but it severely weakens the structure.  What's more, there are several holes in the conglomerate, created by the original builder's wooden scaffold.	It turns out that this elegant marble facing is the Tower's main support.  The stress created by the lean falls mainly on this thin façade.  That's why many of the bricks are cracked.  One may be the start of a collapse.  To pinpoint this potential catastrophe, Macchi must locate the Tower's zone of maximum stress.  Detailed measurements, and data from the monitors, are fed into a computer which calculates structural stress, and highlights it in blue.  The largest stresses are on the south side, below the lean, on the second story, where a doorway meets the staircase.  This is where the collapse will begin.	If the marble here gives way, the 14,000 ton Tower won't merely crumble.  The tensions accumulated over centuries will be unleashed with immense and sudden force.  Thankfully this ticking time-bomb has always been well maintained.  Even today minor repairs are carried out by Pisan stonemasons who replace some of the damaged marble with newly chiseled blocks.	But traditional maintenance will no longer contain the growing stress of the lean.  In 1992 a dozen plastic-coated metal tendons are wrapped tight around the critical second story.  The cracks are held shut and the collapse prevented, or at least delayed.  This is one of the great monuments of medieval Europe.  So the unsightly tendons cannot remain in place here indefinitely. Now that the structure has been strengthened, the Committee begins to search for a permanent solution.  The quest carries the engineers into strange territory - deep into the ancient mysteries of the Tower.  Medieval Italy was tower mad.  Skylines like this one at San Gimignano just south of Pisa were commonplace.  For the princes and merchants, the bigger your tower, the more wealth and power you projected.  Today Pisa is a quiet university town.  But medieval Pisa was an aggressive trading power and one of the richest cities in the world.  Piero Pierotti is an historian at Pisa University.  Although not on the Committee, he is an expert on the Tower.	In 1064, just inside the north wall of the city, work began on a massive Cathedral.  The wedding-cake tiers of marble columns were an early expression of the style that would later embellish the Tower.  Inside are more colonnades.  Horizontal layers of black and white marble seem to draw worshippers towards the artistic climax - the apse - with its haunting mosaic, Christ In Majesty.  The Pisans borrowed ideas from other cultures. There are Byzantine mosaics - and an Islamic dome.  And they recycled the marble of classical buildings, inviting comparisons to the glory of ancient Rome.  They built what is still one of the largest baptisteries in Italy.  Here the richest citizens were christened in style.  This bizarre architectural mix has gothic pinnacles sprouting from the trademark Romanesque colonnades. Still, the medieval Pisans weren't satisfied.  They decided to give their new Cathedral the most extravagant bell tower the world had ever seen.  But their ambition exceeded good building practice.	This painting reveals the Pisan masons had plenty of  experience building Towers.  What were the soil conditions that worried them 800 years ago?  Between Pisa and the nearby coast is an alluvial marsh.  Perhaps this is what the ground around the Tower was like before construction began.  Soil engineer John Burland travels to the shoreline to assess what effect this ground might have had upon the Tower.	A team of scientists performs an ingenious experiment to reconstruct Pisa's geological history.  A three-foot high aluminum model of the Tower is placed upright on sand which has been carefully arranged to mimic the silt below the Tower.  Sandy silt and metal Tower are then lowered into a centrifuge which will simulate the effect of hundreds of years of gravity.  Centuries are compressed into a few weeks.  When taken out of the centrifuge, this Tower leans just like the real thing.  Not only did the model sink, but it sank unevenly - just like the real Tower, which was built on ground no more solid or consistent than a beach.	So the Tower settled more deeply into the softer silt on the south side.  The scientists have explained the Leaning Tower of Pisa.  Now they must save the Tower, by finding a way to halt - even reverse - the lean.  Proposals arrive in Pisa from all over the world.  Some devised by qualified engineers, others by schoolchildren.  But most rely on some version of a huge prop. Aesthetically, this would be unacceptable, and would probably destroy the tower.	The search for a solution takes the engineers back into history.  The Tower has always been cared for by an organization called the Opera,  whose presidents represent an unbroken line of craftsmen right back to the 11th century.  The Opera archives contain a priceless hoard of information.  A report from 1550 showed the top was already 12 feet south of the base.  The first scientific measurement was made by two British architects, Edward Cresy and George Taylor.  But this was a static observation.  Regular surveys have been made since 1911.  And these reveal the Tower has stopped settling into the silt.  The ground has hardened.  The Tower is no longer sinking - it's capsizing.	In July 1993 the engineers begin to act.  They load 600 tons of lead ingots on the rising north side.  As the lead is piled up, there is always the danger that the ground might give way again.  So the Tower's reaction is scrutinized by the electronic monitors.	The lean is brought under control for the first time in 800 years, but the beautiful Tower has become an eyesore.  So a permanent solution is devised, with no lead weights.  It is based on removing soil from beneath the Tower.	Reducing the lean by 10% will shift the Tower north by half a degree. In the Piazza, an experiment is done on a concrete test tower which is taller and heavier on the south side and so simulates the forces under the lop-sided Leaning Tower.	But some have doubts about soil extraction.	At tense Committee meetings, Carlo Viggiani becomes the first apostle of soil extraction.	 But some have no faith in this time machine.	There is so much at stake, it's hard to reach an agreement - especially with so many experts.	Before approving soil extraction, the fractious Committee demands conclusive evidence that this intervention will not damage the Tower.  The soil engineers must establish precisely how this fragile structure reacts to changes in the ground below it.  Yet again, the answer lies in the past.  Jane Morley is an architectural historian who has studied the Tower extensively. 	Perhaps something the medieval builders did will give modern engineers useful insights into the mysterious interaction between this structure and the soil.  The first clue is in the impressive craftsmanship of the exterior marble.	These stones reveal an extraordinary history.  Construction of the Tower began in 1172.  After about six years the masons had reached the fourth level, but then they stopped.  The Tower was abandoned for almost a century. Probably this was due to political and economic strife.  But perhaps the delay was really a brilliant strategy.	When construction did resume, the masons must have noticed a slight lean to the north.  So they tried to straighten the Tower. 	The corrections are so small they cannot be seen with the naked eye and were only discovered recently by detailed surveys.  But as the masons straightened the Tower, it lurched in the opposite direction.  When it reached the seventh story, work stopped again.  Over the next 90 years the southward lean grew to over one and half degrees, a severe inclination that did not deter the masons from adding a heavy bell chamber.	As a result of the delays and corrections over generations, the Tower appears banana-shaped.  This deformity provides the vital clue to the relationship between the soil and the structure - and is the basis of Burland's computer model.	But some believe the computer model oversimplifies the construction of the Tower.	The proof the Committee demands remains elusive.  In the meantime, its deliberations are complicated by yet another proposal, a plan to replace the unsightly tendons.  In his lab, structural engineer Giorgio Macchi experiments on a three-quarter inch thick steel bolt that fits inside the marble blocks - stiffening them from within.  But there is a risk the bolt might actually weaken the marble.  On a test rig, a marble block is forced upwards, while the bolt is held in a vice.  Eventually one will break.  But Macchi has calculated it will not be the marble.  The force builds up to 12 tons.  Then the bolt snaps, leaving the marble unharmed, suggesting a way to strengthen the Tower without defacing it.	So, there are two long term solutions for the Tower.  One would stabilize the structure with internal bolts, the other would reverse the lean through soil extraction.  Faced with this choice, the Committee hesitates, their indecision fueled by a frightening history.  There have been many previous interventions.  All have failed.  The disastrous meddling began with the digging of this trench around the base of the Tower.	As a result, the elegant carvings at the base of the columns on the ground floor had sunk below ground. 	There was more agony in the 1930s. Benito Mussolini, leader of the Fascists, had become dictator of Italy.  His regime rejected the drooping Tower as an inappropriate symbol.  Engineers were ordered to sort out the troublesome lean.  A plumb line was installed to measure it in thousandths of a degree. But below ground the engineers wreaked havoc.  They drilled holes through the floor of the Tower, and almost 200 tons of concrete were poured into the foundations.  The new plumb line recorded a southward lurch of nearly a tenth of a degree.  The work had destabilized the delicate Tower.  In the 1950s, the seven swaying medieval bells were locked tight.  Their vibrations had been shaking the Tower apart.  So precarious was the condition of the Tower that even its bells could tip the balance.  An object lesson that even today must be taken to heart.	Caution is wise, but visitors grow impatient.  Pisa's tourist industry appears to be struggling.  Eventually, the continuing threat of an earthquake and the hideous lead ingots trigger a major political shift and the green light is given to a high risk proposal.	In this plan, anchors will be attached to a concrete ring wrapped around the base of the Tower.  The engineers will drill through the soft soil and secure the anchors in the solid bedrock 130 feet down. The pull from the anchors will replace the push of the unattractive lead weights.  This operation will not reverse the lean, but should halt and stabilize it.  The contractors first attempt to install the ring through which the anchors will be connected to the Tower.  Made of reinforced concrete, the ring is positioned under the floor of the Catino - well beneath the water table. This is a major gamble.	As the contractors burrow down, they inject liquid nitrogen, at a temperature of about 200 degrees below zero, into the ground.  This freezes the surrounding ground water so that it cannot flood the excavation.  During the freezing, Opera president Ranieri Favilli, all too familiar with the consequences of past interventions, gets carried away by an overactive imagination.	As the freezing moves to the sensitive south side, the monitors watch the Tower closely.  At 3
30 a.m. on the 6th of September 1995, the Tower reacts.  The top lurches a 16th of an inch south.	Contractors scramble to restabilize the Tower by loading on more lead ingots.  The lurch is halted, but the Committee's attempt to remove the ugly lead has resulted in an even larger pile around the Tower's base.	The building site around the Tower lies quiet for a year after what becomes known as Black September.  Then in late 1996, because of a dispute within the Italian government, the Committee is disbanded.  Burland's extensive research now looks like it has been a wasted effort.	The Committee remains out of action until the fall of  '97.  Just north of Pisa, the area around Assisi - birthplace of St. Francis - is hit by an earthquake measuring almost six on the Richter scale.  Thousands are left homeless.  Unique historic buildings are damaged beyond repair.  And it soon emerges that although this earthquake was no surprise, little was done to prepare for it.  The resulting scandal inspires a new dynamic attitude in Italian restoration and conservation.  In Pisa, the Committee reconvenes, and approves soil extraction.	But there is no margin for error.  So the engineers on the Committee devise one of the strangest contraptions in this bizarre story.  100 yards north of the Tower, just behind the Opera, contractors begin work.  This is one of two tripods designed to hold steel cables that will run right across the Piazza to brackets on the Tower's second story.  The cables will form a massive harness to support the Tower.	During an unsettling deluge, the first cable of the harness is craned into position.  Although only temporary, this is a huge project.  Just ten yards of this cable weighs half a ton.  If it lashes out from the crane, it could kill the workmen and damage the fragile Tower.  At a critical moment, the cable slips and jams into a marble arch.  Locals come out to watch and hope that the Tower will not overreact.  Hours later, the struggle to free the cable is successful.  That night the first component of the harness is secured.  The completed harness is carefully balanced and adjusted.  It looks like heavy engineering, but there's only enough force exerted on the Tower to resist a minor mishap.	The scene is set and the soil extraction is put to the test.	The success of soil extraction hinges on the assumption that the ground below the Tower is mainly silt.  On day one, soil begins to spew out of the extractor casing. But it looks like clay, not silt.  Burland is eager to make an on-the-spot analysis.	The Tower has been creeping south for centuries, so the lean will not be reversed in a few hours.  Right now, the main fear is that the drilling will trigger a catastrophic lurch further south.  But the Tower is quiet, and the operation continues.	After one month of soil extraction the top of the Tower has moved a fifth of an inch north.  But the stable position of 300 years ago lies another foot away.  Even if the operation goes well, it will take about two years to coax the Tower that far north.  Until then, the Leaning Tower of Pisa will remain wired-in and strapped-up like a patient on the operating table.  Its progress will be anxiously watched, lest this enigmatic structure confronts us with an unwelcome surprise.	It was one of the most sensational murders of the century, and it was never solved. It happened in Bay Village, Ohio, on July 4th, 1954. In the early hours of the morning, a prominent citizen is murdered in her own bed. Marilyn Sheppard, the wife of a handsome surgeon,  killed by more than 15 blows to her head. Today, modern forensic science is still on the killer's trail. But 45 years ago, that trail seemed to lead to the victim's husband. Dr. Sam Sheppard was convicted of murder in a highly publicized trial. Sentenced to life in prison, he served 10 years - until the U.S. Supreme Court overturned his conviction. In a second trial, Sheppard was acquitted, but suspicions about his guilt remained. Did Sheppard kill his wife? And if he didn't, who did? Now the son of Marilyn and Sam Sheppard is taking the case to court one final time - suing the state of Ohio for two million dollars for the wrongful imprisonment of his father. And the state of Ohio is fighting his claim. Along with a team of attorneys and forensic scientists, Sheppard will try to prove his father's innocence and build a case against the man he believes to be the real killer. Their work could have far-reaching implications. The team will apply new techniques of DNA analysis to re-examine old evidence, using science to extend the reach of justice, even beyond the grave. Perhaps they will also establish once and for all
 Cleveland, Ohio. In this decrepit warehouse, a murder is being planned. Sheppard and his attorney Terry Gilbert are suing the state of Ohio, asking two million dollars in damages. But the state sees the case as a dangerous legal precedent and is fighting it tooth and nail. Just what did happen that hot summer night 45 years ago is still shrouded in mystery. On the evening of July 3rd, 1954, Sam Reese Sheppard was looking forward to a family cookout scheduled for the next day. He was seven years old. At 6 AM, police responded to an agitated call from the Sheppard home. When they arrived, they found Marilyn Sheppard dead. The house had been ransacked. The Sheppards were one of Bay Village's more glamorous families. But there was another side to Sheppard's charm and good looks. There were rumors that that he had cheated on his wife. In a series of front-page editorials, Cleveland's major newspaper accused Dr. Sheppard of his wife's murder. Three weeks after the murder, Sheppard was arrested and charged with the crime. At the trial, the prosecution argued that Sheppard's story just didn't add up. Sheppard seemed to be hiding something. Then prosecutors caught him in a lie. At an inquest, Sheppard stated that he had never been unfaithful to his wife. But at trial, prosecutors presented Susan Hayes, a 24-year-old medical technician. She described a three-year sexual affair with Dr. Sheppard. The revelations rocked Cleveland, and the trial soon became an international story. Throughout the trial, Sheppard's attorney objected to the crush of reporters and cameras in the courtroom, but the judge, running for re-election, refused to restrain the media. After eight weeks of testimony, the jury returned its verdict. Sheppard was transferred to prison. Then, three weeks later, his mother shot and killed herself.  His father died days later from a bleeding ulcer.  Sheppard would later write that the only thing keeping him from suicide was Sam Reese, his son. The set is almost finished.  Now, Gilbert's team of experts is ready to go to work. Over the next few days, they'll re-examine every aspect of the case - particularly the work of Paul Kirk, a pioneering forensic scientist who studied the crime scene after Sheppard's conviction. Kirk, who usually worked for prosecutors, was hired by the Sheppard family to evaluate the evidence. He agreed to take the case, but warned that he might only find further evidence of Sheppard's guilt. Kirk was a biochemist by training, and he was also an expert in an obscure forensic specialty - blood spatter analysis. The police had treated the crime scene as little more than a bloody mess, but Kirk understood something the police didn't. The spatters of blood left on the walls and floors of the Sheppard home, if properly interpreted, might provide clues about how the crime was committed. Bart Epstein was Paul Kirk's student in the 1960s.  He's been analyzing blood spatters for 30 years. It's a simple fact of physics
 when a flying drop of blood hits a surface, it leaves a stain with a telltale shape. The shape of the stain indicates not only the direction of travel, but also how far the drop has flown. In the Sheppards' bedroom, Kirk analyzed the shapes of hundreds of blood drops. On the set, Epstein will attempt to reproduce Kirk's findings. He'll work backwards - first, retracing the original blood patterns as Kirk found them, then re-enacting the murder itself. Epstein draws his own blood. Scientific accuracy requires the real thing. A specialized helmet is soaked with the blood. The splatter pattern produced by Epstein's simulation is strikingly similar to the original. The two patterns exhibit drops of similar size, spacing and height.  But that's not all. Epstein's splatters matched the ones Dr. Kirk found in another way. This is a bird's eye view of the murder room drawn by Kirk. In one corner of the room, he noted that the walls were completely free of splatters, as if something had blocked the flying blood. What cast this bloodless shadow?  It was the killer himself. Marilyn Sheppard's attacker had shielded the corner of the room with his own body. Blood that would have hit the corner of the room was intercepted by the killer. So he had to have been splattered with blood. Kirk's finding didn't fit with the case against Dr. Sheppard because, on the morning of the murder, the police noted that Sheppard had no blood on him, except for a small smudge on his trousers. But Kirk wasn't finished.  He turned his attention to the closet door, and one, unusual blood stain. This stain was significantly larger than the others.  It could have flown only inches before hitting the wall. It couldn't have come from the bed. So where did it come from? Dr. Kirk believed that the large stain was left by the killer, who must have been wounded during the struggle. Evidence for this theory came from outside the bedroom - the trail of blood drops leading out of the house. Investigators documented over 40 drops in the blood trail. At trial, the prosecution claimed that the blood trail came from the dripping murder weapon. They said that Dr. Sheppard himself had carried the weapon, probably one of his surgical instruments, through the house, dripping along the way, but Kirk knew that was impossible. A murder weapon could not retain enough blood to create such a long blood trail. But if a weapon couldn't leave the blood trail, there was something that could - an open wound. Kirk believed that in the desperate struggle for her life, Marilyn Sheppard had wounded her attacker. The killer then spilled his own blood as he escaped. Kirk wrote in his report that it wasn't a dripping murder weapon, but the bleeding murderer who had left the blood trail - and the large stain on the closet door. This finding as well flew in the face of the case against Dr. Sheppard because on the morning of the murder, investigators examined Dr. Sheppard top to bottom. Their finding
 not a scratch on him. It was a stunning piece of scientific deduction. From a seemingly random set of blood stains, Kirk had found compelling evidence that Dr. Sheppard might have been telling the truth all along. Sheppard's lawyers immediately filed for an appeal, based on Kirk's findings, but their motion was denied. The Ohio Court ruled that the report had come too late to be considered. Dr. Sheppard would spend the next ten years behind bars. 1963. The case takes a turn when a brash young attorney named F. Lee Bailey becomes Sheppard's lawyer. Bailey files a new appeal - claiming that Sheppard didn't get a fair trial, a result of the slanted media coverage at the time. In a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court overturns Sheppard's conviction and sets new rules for media coverage. Within months, Sheppard is tried again, but this time, Dr. Kirk is the star witness. The trial lasts three weeks. The verdict - not guilty. Sheppard is already remarried to a woman he corresponded with in prison. He and his new family are determined to put the long nightmare behind them. Dr. Sheppard turns to alcohol and drugs. Incredibly, in the last years of his life, he becomes a professional wrestler,  his nickname in the ring
 "Killer Sheppard". Four years after his acquittal, Dr. Sam Sheppard died. He was 46 years old. Sam Reese Sheppard has spent his adult life working to clear his father's name. Now, he has his final chance in the lawsuit he and attorney Terry Gilbert are bringing against the state of Ohio. It's an uphill battle. To win, they'll need an Ohio jury to declare Dr. Sheppard innocent of his wife's murder. That's a much tougher legal standard than a simple acquittal. Gilbert needs to convince a jury beyond all reasonable doubt that Sheppard did not kill his wife. He'd like to use a powerful new scientific tool, unavailable at the earlier trials, that could potentially settle the question once and for all - forensic DNA analysis. DNA is the material that makes up our genes, found within almost every cell in our body. Human DNA is made up of billions of chemical building blocks. At certain locations, the arrangement of these building blocks varies in predictable ways from one individual to another. These variations are called alleles, and they are the key to DNA fingerprinting. If enough of them can be observed and compared, these genetic variations can identify an individual as uniquely as a fingerprint. Scientists are now able to compare the DNA found at crime scenes to DNA taken from suspects. From those comparisons, they can identify likely participants in a crime. As valuable as it may be in prosecuting crime, it's DNA's ability to rule out suspects that holds the most power. Barry Sheck, who attacked the prosecution's DNA results in the O.J. Simpson case, sees it as a revolutionary new tool to give those falsely convicted a way to prove their innocence. The defense team hopes that DNA can rewrite the verdict of history in the Sheppard case. But they need biological evidence, so they've spent years tracking down surviving artifacts from the crime. Gilbert enlists the aid of Dr. Mohammad Tahir, a forensic DNA specialist in Indianapolis. He sends Tahir a set of artifacts, all stained with blood from the crime,  among them
 a wood chip lifted from the stairs of the Sheppards' house; a section of flooring from the porch and a scraping from the closet door blood stain. Tahir agrees to test the samples, but warns that any biological material in them may have already decomposed. The poor quality of the samples means that Tahir cannot use the most discriminating tests, which require large quantities of intact DNA. Tahir chooses a test called DQA1. The test is named for the tiny segment of human DNA that it analyzes. The DQA1 test is designed to work with tiny quantities of DNA, but it isn't very discriminating. The test can identify only 8 different alleles in 42 possible combinations. Any one of those combinations is shared by millions of people. Could a flashlight like the one described have been used to kill Marilyn Sheppard? Dr. Kirk believed that a cylindrical object was the most likely murder weapon. By striking a model of Marilyn Sheppard's head, Sobel will attempt to reproduce the fatal wounds. But Marilyn's wounds were more than skin deep - her skull was fractured. Gilbert confers with Pittsburgh medical examiner Cyril Wecht to see if the fractures can reveal anything about the weapon that caused them. The size and pattern of the skull fractures suggest they were made by a blunt object, not a sharp one. The forensic experts agree with Kirk - a cylindrical object, not a surgical instrument, was the likely murder weapon. Gilbert also asks Wecht about another unresolved aspect of the case. Was Marilyn Sheppard, then four months pregnant, sexually assaulted? Kirk believed she was. He wrote that the position of her body indicated a sexual attack. Wecht agrees. It's a crucial point. If a rape did occur, it would support Gilbert's theory that an intruder, not her husband, killed Mrs. Sheppard. And the intruder theory is reinforced when another surprising document turns up in the files. A tool mark, a scratch or gouge made by a tool like a screwdriver, is frequently a sign of a break-in. The Gilbert team is building a detailed theory of the crime. On the night of the murder, a burglar breaks into the house, intending to steal - and to sexually assault Marilyn. But when she fights back, wounding her attacker, he flies into a rage, kills her with his flashlight and runs out of the house, bleeding. It's plausible, but Gilbert knows it's probably not enough to guarantee victory. For that, he needs something more. He needs to identify the real killer. Gilbert thinks he knows who the real killer is. He's a man who was first questioned about the crime in 1959, and has been suspected ever since. His name is Richard Eberling. Sam Reese Sheppard once visited Eberling in prison, where he was serving a life sentence for an unrelated murder.  Sheppard wanted to see the man who had reportedly bragged to other inmates that he had murdered Marilyn Sheppard and gotten away with it. In 1954, Eberling ran a window washing business in Bay Village. The Sheppards were among his customers. Five years after the murder, Eberling was arrested for larceny. In his possession was one of Marilyn Sheppard's rings. During police questioning, Eberling made a strange statement. He volunteered that he had cut himself - and bled while working inside the Sheppard home a few days before the murder. Was Eberling trying to cover his bloody tracks? Sam Reese found that Eberling had an eerie familiarity with the details of the crime. But for 40 years there's never been enough evidence to make a case against Eberling. Gilbert obtains a court order to have Eberling's blood drawn for DNA testing. The blood is sent to Dr. Tahir's lab for analysis. It's a gamble. If the DNA ties Eberling to the crime scene, it will be the first physical evidence linking him to the murder. But if the results exclude Eberling, Gilbert will lose a pillar of his case. Dr. Tahir can now complete the testing. The DNA from each of the samples, from the crime scene, from the Sheppards, and from Eberling, is now poured over the sensitized paper test strips that will reveal the long awaited results. Each test strip is printed with a set of numbers. One or both of Marilyn's alleles are absent from the blood trail samples. The DNA results have corroborated the most important part of Gilbert's case. Since neither Marilyn nor Dr. Sheppard contributed to the blood trail - a third person had to be in the house that night. Could it have been Richard Eberling? Eberling has two copies of the same allele - the 4.1. And the 4.1 shows up in both the porch stain and the wood chip. One stain in the blood trail, the porch stain, matches his type perfectly. Tahir next presents the results from the most important stain in the case - the large spot from the closet door. Dr. Kirk predicted it would be a mixture of the killer's blood and Mrs. Sheppard's. Indeed, the spot contains the 1.1, 1.3 and 4.1 types - an apparently perfect mixture of Marilyn Sheppard's and Richard Eberling's alleles. It appears the results have not only excluded Dr. Sheppard, but have nailed the case against Eberling. But the evidence against Eberling is weaker than it seems. Sheck, experienced in attacking DNA evidence, begins to point out problems. The porch stain, which matches Eberling exactly, will never stand up in court. The control dot on the test strip didn't turn blue. That means there wasn't enough DNA of any kind to be considered reliable. So the result, even though it's consistent with the other samples, could be an error. What about the most compelling piece of evidence, the large spot on the closet door? It seems to contain a perfect mixture of Eberling and Marilyn's types. But this result, too, is inconclusive. Because the test itself has a quirky limitation. The stain contains a mixture of the 1.1 allele and the 1.3. In this situation, the test is unable to detect the 1.2 allele - even if it's there. And since Dr. Sheppard's alleles are 1.2 and 1.3, Tahir can't rule out the possibility that Dr. Sheppard's type is present in the closet door sample. The test simply cannot tell. Gilbert will try to persuade the jury to overlook the ambiguity. Why assume Dr. Sam's type is hiding in the closet door stain - since it's nowhere else in the blood trail? And there's another problem, one that looms over nearly all DNA analysis - contamination. A number of samples contain alleles that don't match any of the key players - not Marilyn, Sam, or Eberling. Why? The samples were collected decades before DNA testing was developed. Anyone who handled them over the years could have left their own DNA, from a sneeze, a drop of sweat, even a flake of skin.  So it's possible that, like the other mystery alleles, the 4.1 could have come from contamination, and not Richard Eberling. Nevertheless, Gilbert decides to go public with the DNA results. He calls a press conference to argue the case against Eberling. Gilbert takes a calculated risk. He demands that the prosecutor indict Eberling for the murder of Marilyn Sheppard. A criminal indictment would give Gilbert a strong hand in his civil case.  But the strategy backfires. The prosecutors, Stephanie Tubbs-Jones and Carmen Marino, are furious at Gilbert's grandstanding. Tubbs-Jones grills Tahir on the weakness of the DNA evidence against Eberling. Gilbert knows that Eberling's 4.1 allele is shared by millions of people -  a fact sure to come up in court. Gilbert may have miscalculated. By trying to force their hand, he may have pushed the prosecutors into fighting the case even harder.  In 1998, events take another turn. Richard Eberling dies in prison from heart failure.  Any hope of a confession is gone. Soon after, Stephanie Tubbs-Jones is elected to the United States Congress. The new prosecutor, Bill Mason, makes a surprise announcement. He orders the exhumation of Marilyn Sheppard's body, in order to conduct a new examination of her head injuries, as well as another round of DNA typing. He wants his experts to find flaws in the science now central to Gilbert's case. In spring 1946, an order came through to destroy all the records of what had been the Allies' most secret operation of World War II
 the codebreaking unit at Bletchley Park. By mid 1940, the German Army had conquered all of western Europe. Hitler was tightening the noose around Britain.  In the Atlantic, German U-boats were decimating Allied convoys, threatening to cut off Britain's only lifeline.  But Churchill had a secret weapon, the strangest military establishment in the world.  Crossword fanatics, chess champions, mathematicians, students and professors, Americans and British, all came here with one common aim
 to unlock the secrets of the Enigma, a machine that concealed Germany's war plans in seemingly unbreakable code.  If Enigma could be penetrated, everything Hitler plotted would be known in advance.  At Bletchley Park there unfolded one of the most astonishing exploits of the Second World War.  Many here had never seen a code before, yet it was their job to find a way to crack Enigma.  In the process, they devised ingenious codebreaking machines that were forerunners of the modern computer.  But everything they did remained classified for 30 years.  Tonight NOVA reveals the secrets of the men and women who helped turned the tide of victory and shape the future. In 1939, Germany introduces a devastating new kind of warfare, blitzkrieg.  Lightning attacks by tanks and planes bring Europe to its knees. Blitzkrieg depends on surprise, demanding speedy communication.  So radio is crucial to the attack plans.  Every day the skies are full of German radio signals.  The German high command has trained thousands of wireless operators in preparation for the conquest of Europe.  Their job is to be able to interpret  Morse code in any conditions.  But there is still the problem of how to keep the messages secret.  So the German military has adopted a seemingly invincible code-making machine.  The Enigma turns a message into unintelligible gibberish, letter by letter.  When the message is sent in Morse code, all an enemy would see is a meaningless string of letters.  But when the German operator at the receiving end types the coded letters back into his Enigma machine, the real message appears.  In this way vital war plans remain totally secret.  The high command never wavers from its belief in the security of Enigma.  They are so confident that they deploy the Enigma throughout the German war machine.  They never imagine what was about to happen at Bletchley Park. This is the machine the German high command believed would protect their secrets.  This is the Enigma. Long before the war began, the airwaves were full of coded messages as Hitler prepared for battle.  Cracking the German ciphers became the priority of a special British Intelligence unit.  In 1938, the unit, known as the Government Code and Cipher School, or GC&CS, moved into Bletchley Park, an ornate mansion 50 miles north of London.  From this rooftop room, wireless operators contacted listening stations all over Britain that were intercepting German messages.  Bletchley Park's code name was Station X.  The challenge of breaking the Enigma demanded a special kind of talent.  GC&CS set about recruiting. Bletchley Park evolved into a unique operation in which military discipline, uniforms, and rank no longer mattered.  The sole imperative was to break the Enigma, and break it as quickly as possible. But youth and determination weren't enough.  Mathematicians were enlisted to take on the daunting complexity of the Enigma.  Only a completely new approach to codebreaking could help to penetrate its secrets.  But if the work at Bletchley Park were to succeed, absolute secrecy was essential.  Some of the recruits had no idea of the purpose of their work. The Germans were supremely confident in the Enigma.  Its basic principle was simple, but it could scramble messages in millions of different ways.  Pressing one typewriter key would light up a totally different letter. An electrical current was sent from the keys to the letters through a series of rotors.  Each time a key was pressed a rotor would turn, altering the wiring and so changing the letter that was produced. The Enigma was first developed as a commercial encryption device in the 1920s and patented in London.  German banks and railways were among its first customers, but the German military was quick to see its potential.  Each day German operators in the field received a new set of instructions from base on how to set up the Enigma.  They had to make three adjustments so that both the sender's and receiver's machines would match.  First, which rotors to put into the machine and in what order. The second step was to change the wiring of each rotor by adjusting the ring of letters around the rim - 26 combinations on each wheel.  The third step was the plugboard.  Using his secret instructions for the day, the operator could wire up each typewriter key to a totally different letter. Once the machine was set up, the message was encoded letter by letter.  These letters were then sent by Morse code to the receiver at the other end.  The Germans were never shaken in their belief in Enigma's invincibility.  At first, all the codebreakers had were meaningless groups of coded letters and endless patience.  And in the first months of the war the new recruits were getting nowhere. The search for a solution began long before the war.  Starting in 1931 and continuing for seven years, a hard-up German army clerk secretly obtained more than 300 documents, including the instructions and settings for the Enigma machines.  He sold them to the French Secret Service, but their cryptographers showed little interest.  Next the stolen documents were offered to the British Secret Service.  At this stage, GC&CS was skeptical that Enigma could be broken and politely declined the offer.  Finally the documents went to the Poles.  With Germany breathing down their necks, their response was very different.  A deal was struck.  With the stolen documents in hand, three brilliant young Polish mathematicians, Zygalski, Rozycki and Rejewski, set to work on the Enigma.  The Poles soon realized that they had to figure out how the Germans had wired the Enigma's keyboard to the first rotor.  Since any typewriter key could be wired to any letter on the rotor, the number of possible wiring orders was astronomical.  But if the Poles could work this out, it would be a vital first step in breaking the Enigma. But in 1939, on the eve of the invasion of Poland, the Germans added an extra choice of rotors to the Enigma and the Poles could no longer read any of the messages.  In desperation, they invited British and French officials to a secret meeting in a forest near Warsaw.  They revealed how they had previously broken the Enigma.  The British were astonished. Within weeks of that meeting, Poland was invaded and war broke out. The Polish cryptographers had given Bletchley Park their own replica of the Enigma machine, but the extra rotors the Germans had added meant that the codebreakers were still in the dark.  As the flow of German messages increased, at last they began to see a way of achieving the impossible.  The starting point was the messages themselves.  The British had set up a worldwide network of radio listening posts operated by the military, the post office, and even the London police.  They were known as Y Stations. Round the clock and around the world, thousands of operators were writing down meaningless groups of coded letters, the raw material for Bletchley Park.  Their approach to cracking the Enigma began with another Polish breakthrough.  One of the special procedures the Germans followed in setting up their machines was known as a double indicator.  It was to be the Enigma's Achilles' heel.  The instruction sheets for each day told the German operator how to set up his Enigma.  They specified the order of the rotors and the position of the ring of letters around each rotor.  The sheets then provided instructions for wiring up the plugboard.  All Enigmas on a network had to be set up identically for the system to work.  But there was one extra level of security.  If the enemy captured the instruction sheets, they would be able read all the messages.  To prevent this, each message had its own secret rotor setting, chosen by the operator.  First the operator had to pick three random letters.  He sent these in plain text to the operator at the receiving end, allowing that other person to line up his machine identically. So the operator encoded a second group of three letters as the secret message setting itself. By encoding the same letters twice, the Germans gave the codebreakers their first clue about the setting of the Enigma rotors.  Soon there was a second clue.  The Poles had noticed a strange quirk in the way the rotors worked.  In about one out of eight intercepts, the Enigma was turning one of the letters in the message setting into the same coded letter twice.  The mistake of sending the message setting twice was revealing a flaw in the machine itself.  Although it was designed to produce random coded letters, there were certain situations in which the Enigma was much less random than the Germans believed. It was just such a flaw that broke the Enigma.  Bletchley Park called the repeated letters "females."  Only a few configurations of the machine could produce these females.  If the codebreakers now worked their way through them, they would find that day's settings.  The codebreakers produced huge cards, known as Jeffries sheets, with holes punched through in an alphabetical grid representing the wheel positions that could produce females.  By lining these sheets over each other, the codebreakers could hunt through the wheel positions to find out how the Enigma had been set up for that day. In the spring of 1941, the naval war was building up in the Mediterranean.  Hitler had joined forces with the Italian Fascist Mussolini. Both dictators were dreaming of global empires.  The Allies knew that the Germans had given Enigma machines to the Italians.  One of the codebreakers trying to break in to the Italian messages was 19-year-old Mavis Lever. Mavis and the other codebreakers didn't know it, but they were about to make their first major impact on the war. The British fleet was based in the Egyptian port of Alexandria under the command of Admiral Andrew Cunningham.  Bletchley Park intercepted a message that would lead the Admiral to hatch a clever plan. Mavis had decoded just the message that Cunningham needed to outwit the Italians. Within hours the decoded message was on its way to Cunningham in Egypt.  The Italian fleet was gathering off Cape Matapan on the Greek coast. Their plan was to attack a British convoy at midnight.  Alexandria was a nest of spies.  The problem for Cunningham was how to act on the message without giving his plans away.  If he led the fleet out to sea the Italians would know immediately.  Cunningham embarked on an elaborate ruse to fool the spies.  He wanted his enemies to believe that all was quiet. But at night Cunningham slipped back on board and led the British fleet out to sea, to the precise spot where the Italian ships were gathered. The ruse worked.  Cunningham caught the Italians completely off guard.  That night the Italians lost nearly 3000 men, the cream of their navy.  It was the first major coup for Bletchley Park. The Navy were the heroes of the Battle of Matapan.  Bletchley Park was of course never mentioned, but the codebreakers had their own reward. But their joy was to be short-lived. Gloom descended not only on Bletchley Park but on all British cities. For months, relentless bombing had become part of everyday life.  The Blitz was a war of blood and nerves. During the grim months of the Blitz, Bletchley Park was one of Churchill's few glimmers of hope.  Access to the enemy's innermost secrets could make the difference between victory and defeat.  The codebreakers were working around the clock to break the Enigma.  They had divided into huts to attack different parts of the German war machine.  Hut 6 was now concentrating on the Air Force Enigma. The Luftwaffe's code, nicknamed RED, soon proved vulnerable. Ironically, the German Air Force  thought itself so technologically advanced that it was careless about security.  For months, Bletchley Park had tried to crack the secret messages from German airfields to their headquarters in Berlin. They had to find a way - and quickly.  Hitler was preparing to invade Britain. John Herivel turned his thoughts to the Enigma operator.  There were set procedures to be carried out to prepare each Enigma for that day's messages.  The settings of the rotors and the Ringstellung - the alphabet ring around the rotors - were crucial.  If the secret instructions were not followed exactly, the security of the whole system would be at risk.  But John Herivel discovered that the operators were making a fatal mistake.  It became known as the Herivel tip. The operator had to send the three random letters by Morse to the person at the other end so that both machines would be set to the same start position.  But Herivel realized that if the operator failed to spin his rotors as he should, then the three letters he was sending over the airwaves - uncoded - would be the secret ring setting.  Instructions were quickly sent out to the Y Stations to pay particular attention to the first messages they intercepted each day.  That's when the mistake would show up.  Hut 6 studied the opening letter groups of the intercepts as fast as they arrived to see if the Herivel tip would work.  Sometimes the operator made only a half-hearted attempt to spin the rotors.  So LWZ would become LYB - just a click or two away - or perhaps LUX.  But as the codebreakers plotted out each letter group, they would begin to see clusters of letters that revealed the original secret setting. Herivel's tip was working.  At last, they had a way to break Luftwaffe RED. The codebreakers could now give the RAF vital information about how the Luftwaffe was organized and what it was planning - even if they didn't always know the details. Hut 6 soon saw connections between the two sets of supposedly random letters.  Once they got the first three letters which were sent in plain text, they could often guess the second three, which were in code.  One operator called Walter became legendary at Bletchley Park. Every day he would set his rotors to the first three letters of his name and then type in the first three letters of his girlfriend's name, Klara. HIT was almost invariably followed by LER.  Even Hitler was helping to break the Enigma. Despite its success in breaking the Luftwaffe RED code, Bletchley Park  had got nowhere with the Enigma of the German Navy - and it was the Navy that was now the problem.  By the spring of 1941, German U-boats were wreaking havoc in the Battle of the Atlantic.  Every merchant ship sunk deprived Britain of the supplies it needed to survive.  Slow-moving convoys of merchant ships regularly crossed the Atlantic to and from America.  The United States had not yet entered the war but the convoys supplied half of Britain's food and all of its oil.  Although protected by escorts, its convoys were still easy targets for the German U-boats.  Hitler had ordered Admiral Karl Donitz to destroy Britain's lifeline. Donitz built giant fortified U-boat pens on the French coast.  From here his U-boats could strike out into the Atlantic.  To attack the convoys, Donitz organized his U-boats into hunting groups or wolf packs, operating along specific patrol lines.  As the slow moving convoys crossed the Atlantic, wolf packs of 30 or more U-boats would lie in wait. Donitz controlled the wolf packs by radio messages encoded in the naval Enigma.  Breaking it was to be the biggest challenge faced by Bletchley Park.  If they failed, the Battle of the Atlantic - and the war - could be lost.  One mind held the key to breaking the Enigma, and it belonged to Alan Turing. Soon after becoming a research fellow at Cambridge at only 22, Alan Turing invented the first basic concept of a computing machine.  Bletchley Park suited both his genius and his eccentricity. Alan Turing set himself the challenge of cracking the Enigma.  In an attic room at Bletchley Park, Turing began studying the U-boat messages.  All he had to go on were the scrambled letters.  In an astonishing feat of deduction, Turing discovered exactly how the Germans were hiding the crucial message setting.  Unlike the Luftwaffe, the German Navy was leaving nothing to chance.  Instead of letting the operator choose three letters at random for his message setting, he had to get them from a list.  Although Turing had no information about the naval procedures, he managed to identify exactly how they selected their daily keys from a set of secret tables.  Instead of replacing one letter with another, these so-called bigram tables substituted pairs of letters. Brilliant as Turing's deduction was, it was useless without the secret bigram tables, and those were on board the U-boats.  Then came an amazing stroke of luck.  Captain Fritz Julius Lemp was a hero of the Third Reich.  His U-boat, the U-110, had sunk the first ship in the war.  In April1941, he set out on what was to be his last mission.  David Balme had just turned 20.  He was an officer on H.M.S. Bulldog, which was escorting a convoy from Liverpool bound for America. Georg Hogel was the Enigma operator on U-110. He had been with Captain Lemp throughout the war. This was just the chance that Turing and Bletchley Park had been waiting for.  On board the U-110 were the secret bigram tables. The Germans abandoned ship, leaving the code books behind.  But Georg Hogel had one precious document he had to rescue - a book of love poems to his girlfriend. David Balme led a boarding party across to the stricken submarine. Fearing that the Germans had left men behind to scuttle the boat, Balme went aboard first. The rest of the boarding party began to search the U-boat. They had no idea what they were looking for.  They did not know about the secret bigram tables.  David Balme had never heard of Bletchley Park. Little did David Balme realize that the envelope in his pocket would transform the intelligence battle against the U-boats.  It contained procedural handbooks, a U-boat navigational chart, and the vital bigram tables.  These documents gave Bletchley Park a major leap forward in decoding.  Captain Lemp died in the attack.  No one will ever know why he did not scuttle the U-boat or destroy the codes. The only document on the U-110 that did not end up in British hands was the book of love poems to Edith.  The papers that were captured, including the bigram tables, were priceless.  When the documents reached Bletchley Park, the codebreakers rejoiced.  The tables and charts would lead to a drastic improvement in fixing U-boat positions, so convoys could be routed evasively around the wolf packs. Almost immediately the results were evident.  On June 23rd, 1941, Bletchley Park decoded a U-boat message that would save a convoy.  It was heading for England laden with supplies, and the codebreakers discovered that a wolf pack of 10 U-boats was lying in wait.  Armed with this knowledge, the Admiralty could reroute the convoy and set up a counter attack. The attack lasted five days; two of the U-boats were sunk and the convoy arrived safely.  The Allies had a formidable new weapon in the Battle of the Atlantic.  But the war was far from over.  Frustrated in his attempts to crush Britain, Hitler now dreamed of conquest in the east.  In the spring of 1941, decoded Enigma messages hinted at preparations for a massive invasion of Russia.  Once the invasion was under way, Bletchley Park began decoding other, more alarming messages. Churchill was taking a chance that the Germans would realize their codes had been broken, exposing the work of Bletchley Park.  It was a huge gamble.  In fact, the head of the order police was suspicious and ordered new restrictions on the sending of reports on the mass killings by radio.  Luckily for Bletchley Park, the German high command never lost its faith in the Enigma. But to avoid further risk of exposure, security was tightened and all information resulting from Bletchley Park decodes bore the top secret rating, code word Ultra. By the summer of 1941, Bletchley Park was able to crack the naval Enigma in less than two days, due partly to the U-boat documents and partly because they had learned to exploit a crucial weakness of the Enigma machine. When an operator typed a message on the Enigma, the machine would replace every letter with a different one.  The letter typed in never came out the same. This was yet another basic flaw in the Enigma that could be exploited.  The simple fact that no coded letter could ever be the original letter was vital to the codebreakers in their quest to unravel the messages.  As they studied the intercepts, it became clear that the Germans kept repeating certain set phrases.  It was soon possible to predict which message contained a particular phrase.  Bletchley Park called these phrases "cribs." As military bureaucracy settled into routine, the Germans often sent the same message at the same time every day. When they suspected the presence of a set phrase, the codebreakers then searched for it in a message.  Finding the correct position for the crib relied on the flaw in the Enigma.  The codebreakers lined their crib up against the coded message.  Since they knew the Enigma would never duplicate a letter in the original, if any pairs of letters did match, the phrase must be in the wrong position.  They slid the crib along the message until they found a point where none of the letters were the same.  This could be where the phrase was located.  If successful, they could then work out the Enigma settings for the next 24 hours.  The codebreakers became so adept, they would create their own cribs.  They would ask the RAF to drop mines in a specific stretch of sea.  The Germans would immediately send a message giving a grid reference for the mines. The codebreakers knew the grid reference CF97 would be spelled out in the coded German message.  So they used "caesar fritz nein sieben" as the crib to find the Enigma key.  Bletchley Park  called this gardening.  By now the codebreakers were not merely learning about the Enigma, but about the whole system of war communication.  Could the new intelligence have an impact on an entire military campaign?  The test came in the deserts of North Africa.  A new German general was making a name for himself with his aggressive attacks on the British
 Erwin Rommel. But Rommel's strategy had one major weakness.  He relied totally on the Italians to bring in supplies.  Rommel's supply lines were a natural target for the British. Bletchley Park could pinpoint the location of enemy oil tankers and even know how much gasoline they were carrying.  But to keep Ultra safe, it had to look as though the British knew about the convoys from some other source. But in the game of intelligence, the Allies had losses as well as gains.  Although the German secret service never cracked an Allied cipher machine, Rommel did obtain vital inside information from a spy.  The incident began earlier in 1941 when a group of American codebreakers visited Bletchley Park.  With America not yet officially at war, the secret services on both sides were nervous about collaborating. Although the British worried about the possibility of American security leaks, they began sharing decoded Enigma messages and diplomatic reports about the war.  British security fears were justified, for these exchanges soon gave Rommel his own intelligence breakthrough.  Reports on the British campaign in North Africa were sent regularly to Washington by the U.S. military attaché in Cairo.  The Germans intercepted the messages, but couldn't break the diplomatic code.  Then, in September 1941, the Italian secret service broke into the U.S. embassy in Rome and stole the code book used to encipher all U.S. diplomatic messages.  The thieves copied the code book and returned it to the safe without anyone knowing.  Now Rommel could read all embassy transmissions about the British campaign.  Armed with information about British troops and tanks, Rommel launched a bold assault through Libya, pushing the British back 300 miles in 17 days.  The news that reached Churchill painted a grim picture of defeat.  Now the British needed their own intelligence coup to reverse the disaster.  At Bletchley Park, the codebreakers raced to crack the daily rotor settings.  Some breaks came in only six to 12 hours.  Still, lives might be saved if the operation could be speeded up.  The gifted codebreaker Alan Turing had long been intrigued by the idea of building machines to automate the codebreaking process.  The Poles had built such a device before the war, but Turing set out to improve on their ideas.  Turing's goal was to build a machine that could figure out how the German operators had set up their Enigmas for that day's messages. Turing's machine was vastly more powerful than the Poles' earlier device.  Curiously, Bletchley Park called it the Bomb, perhaps because of the ticking noise it made while operating. The Bomb was an array of electromechanical drums that simulated the rotors of the Enigma machines.  The drums clicked round letter by letter, testing the thousands of possible Enigma settings - 20 every second - until the correct one had been found.  The Bombs radically sped up the pace of decoding. By the end of the war there were 200 of the devices at six different locations, enabling Bletchley Park to decode 90,000 messages a month. Meanwhile, in August 1942, Churchill traveled to North Africa, determined to reverse the Allies' fortunes.  His first action was to inject fresh blood into the leadership of the 8th Army.  He appointed a decisive new general, Bernard Montgomery, to take on Rommel's Africakorps.  He knew from Ultra that Rommel was prepared to attack somewhere in Egypt - but where? Montgomery predicted the ridge at Alam Halfa. But Montgomery had another advantage.  The Allies finally realized that the Germans were reading U.S. embassy reports on the British campaign, so the embassy changed its diplomatic code.  Rommel no longer knew what the enemy was planning.  Montgomery was still receiving Ultra from Bletchley Park.  Soon, the German forces were under enormous pressure.  But some of the decoders began to feel impatient with Montgomery. On the 23rd of October, the British launched its attack at El Alamein. British intercept stations logged over 300 messages a day in the battle that followed.  Bletchley Park knew Rommel's plans, his forces, and his losses.  For the first time in the war, an army moved into battle with precise advance knowledge of the enemy. Ultra told Montgomery of Rommel's critical shortages of fuel and tanks.  On the evening of the 2nd of November, Rommel signaled Hitler for permission to retreat. Hitler replied the next day, ordering Rommel not to yield a step, either victory or death.  Montgomery read the message within hours.  At El Alamein Montgomery's superior forces crushed Rommel.  Yet he decided not to pursue the remnants of the retreating German Army. At the time of El Alamein, the U.S. had been at war with Germany for nearly a year.  Even before Pearl Harbor, the British Admiralty had been passing decoded U-boat messages to the American Navy.  Churchill and Roosevelt knew that the Battle of the Atlantic was crucial and that Ultra gave them a vital edge in the fight against the U-boats.  In February 1942, the Admiralty received disastrous news.  An abrupt change in the U-boat code plunged Bletchley Park into darkness.  They could no longer read the U-boat signals. Equally serious was an abrupt change in U-boat tactics.  German submarines switched from the North Atlantic and began prowling the eastern seaboard of the U.S.  There, the marauding U-boats maintained radio silence.  When they did transmit, their signals couldn't be decoded.  All over the Atlantic, the Allied navies struggled to cope with mounting losses at sea.  As the crisis deepened, the naval Enigma team at Bletchley Park worked round the clock to crack the new code, which they called Shark.  Since none of the old codebreaking tricks would work, it was obvious that Donitz had somehow drastically changed the Enigma. For the Allies on both sides of the Atlantic, it was a severe blow. Before the blackout, the Admiralty's submarine tracking room had been able to pinpoint U-boats with the help of the navigational positions radioed between Donitz and his crews.  Now all they had were rough directional fixes on the signals themselves.  Toward the end of 1942, the Allies were losing ships at over four times the rate before the blackout.  Finally Bletchley Park figured out what Donitz had done.  Though still believing the Allies could never crack Enigma, he was worried about internal security, and ordered the addition of a fourth rotor to the machine.  The revolving rotors, with their maze of constantly changing electrical wiring, were the secret of the Enigma. Introducing a fourth one vastly multiplied the number of potential settings. Now the codebreakers would have to build a new type of device to simulate the four-rotor Enigma, and pacify the increasingly impatient Americans. Tensions grew when secrets were withheld from an American intelligence officer visiting Bletchley Park.  He wrote an angry report home. To resolve the crisis, Bletchley Park's second-in-command traveled to Washington for a meeting with the U.S. Navy.  They signed an agreement to resolve concerns about security and to cooperate fully on the breaking of the naval Enigma.  As part of the deal, American codebreakers would be sent to Bletchley Park.  Together they would take on the challenge of the fourth rotor. The first chance to get back into the naval Enigma came when a fresh set of captured U-boat code tables arrived at Bletchley Park, enabling the codebreakers to uncover a critical weakness in the four-rotor system.  The German four-rotor Enigma used mainly on submarines had to communicate with other naval stations that used only a three-wheel machine.  To solve the problem, the fourth rotor could be set in a special position that allowed the machine to simulate an old fashioned three-rotor Enigma.  With the help of the captured tables, the codebreakers worked out the settings of the first three rotors on the Bombs as they had in the past, then simply ran through all 26 positions of the fourth rotor until they found the right one.  Soon, the daily settings were on their way to the Admiralty and America.  After 10 months in the cold, Bletchley Park was back. Once again Bletchley Park could help reroute convoys around the Wolf Packs.  Airborne radar and improved escort support helped assure victory in the Battle of the Atlantic.  Although only a few of the men and women of Bletchley Park were in a position to appreciate it, the breaking of the naval Enigma was their finest hour.  By the spring of 1943, they were decoding dozens of messages a day, and cooperation with the Americans was taken to a new level. The U.S. codebreaking unit was known as Arlington Hall, after its headquarters in northern Virginia.  After the war, it would become the National Security Agency, or NSA.  Here the first American officers were selected to join the codebreakers at Bletchley Park. During their voyage to England, the officers were ordered to tell a bizarre cover story, that they were messenger pigeon experts in the signal corps.  This aroused the suspicions of an officer who was checking their identity. The Americans quickly settled into life at Bletchley Park.  The only serious dispute arose when the British challenged the Americans to a game of rounders, the British version of baseball. As the Americans adapted to their new life, their colleagues told them about a mysterious and daunting codebreaking problem.  They knew that in addition to Enigma, the Germans sometimes used another completely different kind of cipher machine. At first, the decoders puzzled over the origin of the strange signals.  Hitler had demanded a cipher machine for the German high command that was faster and even more secure than the Enigma.  His experts devised a coding system based on the teleprinter machine.  Teleprinters operated on a simple, universal binary code that was widely known.  But the Germans connected the teleprinter to a machine that cunningly exploited the teleprinter language itself to produce a complex code.  The secret German coding machine was called the Lorenz.  To scramble a message the Lorenz used 12 rotors - not just the three or four of the Enigma. The Lorenz relied on a mathematical system called "modulo two addition." This allowed the string of meaningless letters added to the message at one end to be removed at the other by a similar math calculation. The security of the Lorenz depended on the fact that it was adding a string of random letters to hide the real message. Bletchley Park gave the mysterious code the name FISH.  They worked out that fish was based on teleprinter language.  How to strip off the obscuring code was anybody's guess.  But on the 30th of August, 1941, a lazy German operator gave the whole game away. When the operator began to encode the same message a second time, he grew impatient and abbreviated parts of it.  The resulting slight changes enabled the codebreakers to strip off the random letters that were cloaking the message. Now that they had decoded the message, could they use it to figure out exactly how the Lorenz machine worked?  For the next two months, the codebreakers hunted laboriously for patterns in the endless strings of obscuring letters.  Eventually they were able to reconstruct the precise mechanics of the Lorenz - a machine they had never seen.  They even built their own replica.  Since it was used to crack the mysterious Fish code, they called the replica Tunny, after a fish in the tuna family.  Once the Lorenz settings were found, Tunny could turn the messages into plain German.  Despite the advances in understanding Fish, it still took at least a month to decode a single message, and by then the information was generally useless. But the whole process was about to be speeded up.  At the post office research station in London, a brilliant young telephone engineer hit upon the idea of an electronic machine that would automate the hunt for the Fish settings.  The machine would be nothing less than the world's first programmable computer. Though the codebreakers were skeptical, Flowers was convinced the answer lay in vacuum tubes - hundreds of them. Over Christmas 1943, Tommy Flowers installed the world's first programmable computer at Bletchley Park.  Eventually ten more were built, all dedicated to analyzing the secret messages of the German high command. They were given the name Colossus.  Colossus could read a coded message at high speed and then search for the settings of the Lorenz code wheels.  It could accomplish this in minutes instead of a month. Colossus began operating five months before D-Day, the critical invasion of France in June1944 that would turn the tide against Hitler.  Tanks and guns choked every main road and street in southern England.  The Allies prepared an elaborate deception.  They set out to trick the Germans into thinking that the attack on Normandy  was simply a diversion.  Double agents in Britain relayed the false information to Berlin, but only the codebreakers could tell if the deception was working. It was an enormous subterfuge and an even bigger gamble.  Around the clock, the Allies searched for the merest hint of German suspicion.  The invasion was poised to strike.  But then, a vital message was decoded at Bletchley Park. When Bletchley Park decoded Rommel's message, it contained alarming news.  German tanks were massing at the exact spot where American troops were about to parachute into Normandy. It was June 4th, 1944.  Reassured by the codebreakers that all was well, the massive army began to move forward.  Then came a discouraging setback. Twenty-four hours later, the Allies launched the biggest military invasion in history. The decoded messages showed that the deception had worked.  Hitler's troops were split between Normandy and Calais and were unable to counter the onslaught.  Over half the German forces had remained in the northeast, awaiting an attack that never came.  At Bletchley Park, those who knew about the invasion weren't allowed to leave for 48 hours.  Even now, nobody was taking any chances. It had not been a bad day for the codebreakers either.  They had accurately foretold the position of all but two of the 62 German divisions. Enigma and Lorenz messages were read throughout the D-Day operation.  By the end of the war, they had handled at least 63 million characters of high level code between Hitler and his generals.  In the months that followed, Bletchley Park would continue to chronicle the disintegration of Nazi Germany - right until the end of the war.  Finally, at the cost of at least 50 million lives, the Second World War came to an end. In the roll call of those who had brought about victory, the codebreakers of Bletchley Park would never be mentioned.  The operations there were to stay a secret for the next 30 years.  Eight of the ten Colossus machines were destroyed.  The remaining two were moved to British secret service headquarters, where they may have played a significant part in the codebreaking operations of the Cold War.  In fact, the Russian military had developed a code that was similar to the high command's Fish code.  So the techniques invented at Bletchley Park were still to prove vital in a very different kind of conflict.  In 1960, the order finally came to destroy the last two Colossus machines. Tommy Flowers returned to the post office and was forgotten.  In all the secrecy, Colossus never received recognition as the world's first programmable computer.  Instead, that honor was to go to the American Eniac. As for the codebreakers, they all dispersed, some back to universities and others into the fledgling computer industry.  A few stayed on in the British secret service, while some of the Americans returned to Arlington Hall.  The most innovative thinker of all, the man whose inventiveness had been at the center of Bletchley Park's success, died tragically.  In 1954, Alan Turing took his own life after being persecuted as a security risk because he was gay. Apart from the Atom Bomb, there was no greater secret in World War II than the work of the codebreakers of Bletchley Park.  Their breakthroughs gave the Allies a vital edge in the U-boat war, the tank battles against Rommel, and the D-Day invasion.  But their impact was felt far beyond the battlefield. Eavesdropping and decryption won a new prominence in the minds of politicians as well as generals.  The transatlantic alliance, that took its first hesitant steps at Bletchley Park, would mature and prove critical during the Cold War. And the roots of today's computer era trace back directly to the dazzling inventiveness of Turing, Flowers, and their wartime colleagues.  In the end, though, Bletchley Park's greatest achievement lay not in broken ciphers but in the hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of lives it saved. On the morning of Sunday, June 8th, 1924, two Englishmen, George Mallory and Andrew Irvine, set out to climb the final slopes of Mount Everest, the highest mountain in the world.  Shortly after midday, they were spotted less than 1,000 feet from the top.  Then the clouds rolled in and they were never seen again.  More than 60 years after the two men disappeared, we re-examined the legend of Mallory and Irvine.  We retraced their route up Mount Everest and looked again at the evidence of climbers and historians, to try to unravel what remains one of the greatest mysteries of modern exploration.  Could these two men have been the first to reach the top? The last person to see Mallory and Irvine before they disappeared was team geologist Noel Odell.  In an interview just before he died, he told us that he too believed that nothing would have stopped Mallory going for the top. The struggle to reach the highest point on earth had made heroes of Mallory and Irvine and captured the imagination of a world so recently savaged by war.  When news of their loss reached England, the nation publicly mourned and even the king sent a message of condolence to their families. Howard Somervell, a close friend of Mallory's and a member of the 1924 expedition, spoke for many when he wrote
  "I verily believe his death as that of his well-loved and splendid companion is a clarion call to our materialistic age which so terribly needs the true, unselfish spirit typified by George Mallory, alike in his life and in its ending." Until the first Everest reconnaissance expedition of 1921, no Western explorers had been within 40 miles of the mountain and knowledge of high altitude climbing was still very limited.  No one knew, for example, whether it would be possible to survive on the summit at 29,000 feet without bottled oxygen.  These expeditions were exploration in the grand style. Hundreds of porters, cooks and yak herders serving a handful of curiously assorted mountaineers.  The Tibetans were amused by this strange cavalcade. Sir Jack Longland, one of the leading climbers a decade later, was on the unsuccessful 1933 Everest expedition. In fact, these expeditions were organized like military campaigns and the adage that an army marches on its stomach was faithfully observed. Food, supplied by London's leading stores, would not have been out of place in the officer's mess or an English country house.  But despite this gracious living, they were men in the mold of Victorian explorers to whom nothing seemed impossible. All pre-war expeditions attempted Everest from the north side, in Tibet.  Modern expeditions follow the same route across the unchanging landscape.  It is an exhausting 12 mile approach up the East Rongbuk glacier before the mountain is even reached.  The principal barrier to the upper slopes is the imposing cliff of the North Col, 1,000 feet of steep snow and ice.  In 1921, Mallory climbed to the North Col at 23,000 feet to survey the mountain and saw a possible route to the summit. On the morning of June 6th, Odell took this picture of Mallory and Irvine leaving Camp 4 on the North Col.  It was the last picture ever taken of them.  The next day, he received a message sent down with a porter, to say that they had gone on, up to their high camp, 2,000 feet below the summit. An hour after Odell's sighting in the early afternoon of the summit day, the weather suddenly took a turn for the worse.  Concerned for Mallory and Irvine's safety, Odell climbed alone, beyond Camp 6 in a high wind and driving sleet, to try and find his friends, but there was no sign, and as instructed by Mallory, he returned to Camp 4 on the North Col that night.  Over the next two days, despite feeling exhausted, Odell climbed again on his own to the top camp but found no trace of Mallory and Irvine.  He had now been above 23,000 feet for 11 days, and his two ascents to 27,000 feet in search of the missing climbers remains a mountaineering achievement without parallel. Above the high camp, they could not have survived one night on the mountain, let alone two.  Below, at advanced base camp, the rest of the team was anxiously awaiting news.   Finally, in the early evening of June 10th, they saw the pre-arranged signal from the North Col, six blankets laid out in a cross.  It meant simply
 death.  The expedition leader authorized an answering signal.  Abandon hope and come down.  There was no point in mounting another search.  After four deaths, Colonel Norton was not prepared to take further risks.  He felt that Mallory and Irvine's deaths had not been wasted, that they had died to keep alive the spirit of adventure that had made the British Empire.  "We were a sad little party," he said.  "From the first we accepted the loss of our comrades in that rational spirit which all of our generation had learned in the Great War, and there was never a tendency to a morbid harping on the irrevocable.  But the tragedy was very near.  Our friends, vacant tents and vacant places at table were a constant reminder to us of what the atmosphere of the camp would have been had things gone differently." It is a mystery which intrigues all mountaineers.  Chris Bonington, who has led three expeditions to Everest and reached the summit himself in 1985, admits that he is fascinated. In 1986, an American team went to Everest to examine the clues and the conflicting accounts of Mallory's last climb.  The team includes Audrey Salkeld, a British historian, and one of the world's leading authorities on Everest, and Tom Holzel, a Boston engineer who has studied the Everest mystery for 15 years.  Together they have written a book in which Holzel outlines his own controversial theory about what might have happened. And is it any wonder?  Mallory was dressed in layers of wool and a cotton windsuit.  Since the disappearance of Mallory and Irvine, only two real clues have emerged.  One of their ice axes was found high on the mountain in 1933, and the Chinese discovered a body in 1975.  And there is the confusing evidence of Odell's last sighting.  He was over three and a half thousand feet away when he thought he saw them on the Second Step.  The crucial question is, did he in fact see anything at all?  But Odell was less certain about where precisely on the ridge he had spotted Mallory and Irvine.  When he returned to England he was persuaded that it must have been on the first of the prominent rocky outcrops along the ridge, although his instinctive reaction at the time was that they had climbed the higher Second Step, the only real obstacle on the route.  If they were seen on the Second Step, then there is a much stronger possibility that they could have gone on to reach the top.  But were Mallory and Irvine capable of climbing the Second Step anyway?  Most of the early climbers approached the Second Step from below and saw 150 feet of near vertical rock, but Mallory may have come in along the ridge, avoiding some of the major difficulties.  In recent years, several expeditions have tried to climb Everest by Mallory's route.  Catalan mountaineers reached the summit this way in August of 1985, when the Second Step was banked with deep monsoon snows.  The summit team had no real trouble with the Second Step; for them it was a steep snow climb, not the vertical rock wall Mallory would have encountered.  One of those Catalan climbers was Toni Sors.  He recently paid a visit to Mobberley, Mallory's birth place.  He was convinced that this now legendary climber would have been able to lead his partner up the Second Step.  And what difference would the use of oxygen have made? Modern climbers are well aware how quickly the body deteriorates above 19,000 feet, chiefly from oxygen starvation.  Movement becomes slow and painful.  But in the 1920s, the problems of climbing at high altitude were not clearly understood.  After two failed summit attempts without bottled oxygen, Mallory reluctantly concluded that oxygen was the key to success.  But the oxygen sets used in the 1920s were primitive. They were notoriously unreliable and each weighed 33 pounds, an enormous load for climbing at high altitude.  Irvine, after carrying out extensive modifications and reducing the weight by 5 pounds, coaxed the best out of the equipment.  But as an engineer he was appalled.  He wrote home
 "The oxygen apparatus has already been boggled.  They haven't taken my design, but what they have sent is hopeless.  Breaks if you touch it, leaks.  Is ridiculously clumsy and heavy.  Out of 90 cylinders, 15 were empty and 24 leaked badly by the time they got to Calcutta.  Eee gods.  I broke one today taking it out of its packing case." And certainly from the quantity of oxygen they are known to have taken on the final summit attempt, there would not have been enough to get them both to the top.  So is it conceivable that they might have separated, as Holzel has suggested?  Would Mallory have sent Irvine back to make use of oxygen in a solo summit attempt?  It was nine years after the deaths of Mallory and Irvine before another expedition went to Everest.  But the mystery was heightened by the only clue they found regarding the fate of the two climbers.  They came across an ice axe, lying on slabs above Camp 6.  The puzzling thing was that it was lying considerably lower down the route than the point at which Odell believed he last saw Mallory and Irvine.  More than 40 years passed and nothing else was discovered on the mountain.  Then, a rumor reached the west that in 1975, a Chinese climber had stumbled across a body at 26,600 feet on a sloping terrace in the middle of the north face.  It is a story that has never been officially confirmed.  The Chinese are perhaps unwilling to invite speculation about Mallory and Irvine's climb.  It might cast doubt on their own claim to have made the first ascent of the north ridge in 1960.  Wang Hangbao, the Chinese climber who found the body in 1975, died on Everest four years later while climbing with a Japanese team.  The day before he died, he revealed his secret to a Japanese mountaineer, Ryoten Hasegawa.  But it wasn't until the American expedition of 1986 that there was independent corroboration of the story.  Their Chinese liaison officer, Song, who had been climbing with Wang in 1975, confirmed that he believed the story to be true.  The body appeared to have been found directly below where the ice axe was discovered in 1933.  The body has not been sighted since.  Mallory and Irvine are the only climbers known to have been lost anywhere nearby on the mountain.  But which one is it?  Did Mallory or Irvine, wandering off route, stop there and later die of exposure, or did one of them fall to the terrace?  Were they on the way up, or the way down?  The answers are still unknown. Whether they reached the summit or not, it seems clear that Mallory seriously underestimated the time it would take to reach the top and return to the high camp at 27,000 feet.  A common error of judgment at high altitude, but one that may well have cost them their lives.  Climbers understand the dilemma.  Close to the summit, after a long and arduous ascent, the drive to continue to the top can be overwhelming.  Could they have done it?  Geoffrey Winthrop Young, Mallory's close friend and mentor, the most accomplished alpine climber of his day, was convinced they made it.  He wrote
  There was never any doubt among his loyal friends. Veteran explorer Tom Longstaff, who was with Mallory on the 1922 Everest expedition, wrote in a letter to a friend, "It is obvious to any climber that they got up.  You cannot expect of that pair to weigh the chances of return.  I should be weighing them still.  It sounds a fair day.  Probably they were above those clouds that hid them from Odell.  How they must have appreciated that view of half the world.  It was worthwhile to them.  Now, they will never grow old and I am very sure they would not change places with any of us." It was the third expedition the British had launched on the world's highest mountain, and one climber, who was on all three expeditions, knew this would be his last attempt.  George Leigh Mallory was one of the best climbers of his day, Britain's hope for a claim on the summit.  The year was 1924. Conquering Mount Everest had become a matter of national pride.  Mallory's teammates had already made an unsuccessful attempt, and now four months of effort were about to culminate in a single day.  June 8th
 George Mallory and his climbing partner, Andrew "Sandy" Irvine, were spotted shortly after midday, less than 1,000 feet from the summit.  38-year-old Mallory knew the route would be difficult, a rock cliff known as the "Second Step" posed the greatest technical challenge.  Irvine, only 22 at the time, was strong but less experienced.  Minutes passed, then clouds swirled in, and the tantalizing vision of Mallory and Irvine ascending towards the summit vanished forever in the mists.  The expedition had to accept their companions were lost.  Today, a team ascends into the thin air to search for evidence of a body that may be Mallory or Irvine. 75 years after their disappearance, the search reveals new truths.  Were Mallory and Irvine the first to reach the highest point on Earth? For Tibetans, a deity dwells here.  Her name is Chomolungma and her spirit soars on the highest point on Earth, one foot in Nepal, the other in Tibet.  Mountaineers first came to Everest by permission from the Dalai Lama. They journeyed several months, crossing the dry passes of Tibet, approaching the mountain on foot.  They had walked off the map and were now searching for a way up Everest. This year a team has come to determine if Everest was first conquered in 1924 by the British, its earliest explorers.  George Mallory and his teammates willingly stepped into the unknown, ill equipped for the harsh conditions of extreme altitude. Graham Hoyland has climbed Everest once before. Graham's great uncle, Howard Somervell, was with Mallory on Everest in 1922 and 1924.  A talented artist, Somervell was also a surgeon by training. The early climbers struggled up the same route we climb today, carrying loads up a 1,000 foot wall of ice toward the North Col, on the lower flanks of the mountain.  To get here, the expedition has trekked 12 miles along the East Rongbuk Glacier to Advanced Base Camp.  Ropes are then fixed on the head wall of the glacier to reach Camp IV on the North Col.  Now imagine ascending Everest without today's climbing hardware or thousands of feet of fixed rope.  Andy Politz uses a vintage ice axe to demonstrate climbing techniques from the '20s. Chopping hand and foot holds was the painstaking method for placing a route up the vertical ice to the North Col. From the perspective of technique and technology, the odds seem to be against Mallory and Irvine being first up Everest.  Conrad Anker, a top technical climber, is here to assess whether Mallory had the skills to surmount the most difficult part of the route
 a 15 foot rock cliff known as the Second Step.  This barrier has stopped many climbers 750 feet below the summit. Today, they use a ladder.  Could Mallory and Irvine have ascended the Second Step using only a rope and their hands and feet?  Conrad practices on a boulder above Base Camp. The next generation of climbers to follow the British were the Chinese, who were the first to successfully climb Everest from the north.  In 1975, a Chinese climber made a stunning discovery high on the mountain.  Wang Hangbao reportedly walked from his tent at Camp VI for 20 minutes and came upon a body which he referred to as an "old English dead."  It could only be Mallory or Irvine.  Four years later, Wang Hangbao died in an avalanche the day after describing the body to a Japanese climber. The ice axe was lying several hundred feet above the area where the body was discovered near Camp VI.  Experts assumed the body was Irvine, who had fallen to his death.  To find him, the team will search from the point where Wang Hangbao pitched his tent. Simple cartography enabled Jochen Hemmleb to work from the photograph to pinpoint the camp on a map.  From the North Col, the team will climb up the north ridge to Camp V and spend a brief night, before beginning their climb up toward the old Chinese Camp VI and the search area.  The wind-scoured slopes of the upper mountain are free of snow and more likely to reveal anything left frozen on the surface. After five hours of climbing, they cross dangerously sloping slabs, tilting like a low angled slate roof.  They fan out to search for the body, presumably Irvine's, below the spot where his ice axe was found years ago.  But as they begin searching they come across the bodies of other climbers who had fallen to their deaths. The fact that several bodies have collected in one area offers Conrad Anker a critical insight. Conrad hikes out beyond the designated search area. The climbers have returned to Base Camp to examine the artifacts they recovered from Mallory's body.  Then, they'll head back up Everest to search for more answers, closer to the summit. But higher on the mountain, while trying to adjust to the altitude, Graham Hoyland encounters some difficulties. "My one personal trouble has been a cough," Mallory wrote to his wife, Ruth.  "In the high camp it has been the devil....  I couldn't sleep, but was distressed with bursts of coughing fit to tear one's guts, and a headache and misery altogether." George and Ruth had a young family, three children under the age of eight.  "We've got to get up this time," Mallory wrote to his sister Mary. "And if we wait for it and make full preparations, instead of dashing up at the first moment, some of us will reach the summit, I believe....  I wish Irvine had had a season in the Alps." "I wonder if the monsoon will give us a chance....  It is no use sending men up the mountain unfit," Mallory lamented to his wife Ruth.  "The physique of the whole party has gone down sadly....  I'm quite doubtful if I shall be fit enough." June 5th
 Mallory is on the North Col.  The next day, he'll leave with Irvine for Camp V and their summit attempt.  The only remaining clues are the notes found in Mallory's pockets, lists and personal letters, written simply with pencil and paper. Two of Mallory's teammates had made a summit attempt of their own - without oxygen - but they returned, defeated.  Mallory was aware that bottled oxygen was new and unfamiliar when he chose Irvine, an inexperienced climber, as his summit partner. But the oxygen systems were unreliable, heavy, and untested at altitude. This was the last photograph ever taken of Mallory and Irvine, leaving Camp IV, with oxygen, for their summit bid. Above Camp VI, they enter the area known as the Yellow Band. At the bottom of the First Step, Conrad fixes new rope to the route. The camera is turned off so Dave Hahn can rope up and protect Conrad if he falls. After searching for clues from Mallory's belongings, Conrad and the others learn that there is no proof that Mallory or Irvine reached the summit. They discover the only concrete evidence in the mystery is their own experience on the summit day.  The odd twist of circumstance in this discovery is that our climbers never actually found the body they were looking for. Is Irvine still up there, lost on Everest with the one piece of evidence that could solve the mystery? The Western Wall in Jerusalem.  Devout Jews come to worship much as their ancestors did centuries ago.  The time-honored traditions live on - the wearing of prayer shawls and head coverings, the wail of the shofar made of ram's horn.  4,000 miles from Israel, in southern Africa, a people known as the Lemba also heed the call of the shofar.  They have believed for generations that they are Jews, direct descendants of the biblical patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.  However unlikely the Lemba's claims may seem, modern science is finding a way to test them.  The ever-growing understanding of human genetics is revealing connections between peoples that have never been seen before.  Opening new windows into the past.  Tonight we travel across continents and seas - and into the microscopic world of the human genome - to unravel the mysteries of the Lemba, a people who believe themselves to be a lost tribe of Israel. On a hot summer afternoon in South Africa, anthropologist Tudor Parfitt takes the next step in his quest to solve the riddle of the Lemba - a quest that had begun a dozen years earlier following a lecture he'd given in Johannesburg.  The Lemba believe they descend from the ancient tribes that lived in the land of Israel 3,000 years ago.  According to the Bible, the tribes were united and powerful under King David and King Solomon.  But when Solomon died around 900 BC, the confederation of tribes weakened. Most scholars agree that the 10 lost tribes were scattered across the Middle East, and assimilated into local populations.  But throughout history, people from as far as Japan, India, and Ethiopia have been thought by some to be descendants of those long lost tribes. Until recently, there has been no way to test the Lemba's belief in a Jewish heritage.  But now a new key has been discovered that may unlock ancient mysteries
 a key as basic as blood and bone, and infallible as a fingerprint - genetic markers that may confirm an age-old Jewish belief. Another Cohane, Professor Karl Skorecki, and his colleague Neil Bradman each had the idea that Cohanim inheritance might be able to be confirmed genetically. Inside every human cell are 23 pairs of chromosomes, made up of DNA. One half of each pair comes from the mother, the other half from the father. One of those pairs determines a person's sex.  Women generally have a pair of similar chromosomes called XX, men have XY.  If the father contributes his X to the offspring, it will be a girl.  If he contributes his Y, it'll be a boy. It's the Y chromosome that determines maleness.  And the Y doesn't exchange much genetic material with its partner X, so a father passes his Y chromosome on to his son virtually unchanged. To test this hypothesis, researchers went to a beach in Israel to collect DNA from dozens of young Jewish men. The samples are analyzed at University College London.  Liquid from test tubes containing the mouth swabs is treated with enzymes and spun in a centrifuge to separate out the DNA.  The amount of  DNA obtained from each person is so minute that in order to be analyzed, it must first be "amplified" - reproduced millions of times using a process called polymerase chain reaction - PCR.  During PCR, the DNA is heated until its double strand splits into two single strands.  Then the temperature is lowered and each single strand makes a new partner using chemicals that have been added to the liquid.  The machine heats up again until these new double strands split apart.  This process continues for a few hours - a chain reaction, doubling the available DNA with every cycle. Each vertical line of colored dots represents a piece of DNA from the Y chromosome of one individual.  The rate at which the DNA moves through the gel depends on its precise chemical make-up - the order and number of its As, Ts, Gs, and Cs.  DNA with the same chemical make-up will display the same colors at the same places along the vertical lines.  These lines can also be displayed as graphs which highlight the differences and similarities between Y chromosomes. The Cohanim study has far-reaching implications for Tudor Parfitt.   If the Cohen Modal Haplotype is found among a significant percentage of the  Lemba, their claim to Jewish ancestry will suddenly become more credible.  The Lemba are divided into clans.  Parfitt records each man's clan along with his sample. Professor Mathiva belongs to the Buba Clan - descendants of  an ancient leader who, according to the oral tradition, brought the Lemba out of Judea and eventually to Africa. Parfitt's destination is the village of Chigato, where he has heard Lemba traditions are particularly strong. It is morning before Parfitt finally gets permission to take genetic samples.  It's an important day in the village.  There is to be a circumcision ceremony and a feast to honor the ancestors.  These practices include elements of Jewish ritual, but could have evolved from other sources.  Circumcision is a widespread African custom.  Some scholars believe the Lemba were the first to introduce it to the southern continent.  But Jewish custom requires that circumcision take place when a boy is eight days old, and these youths are between seven and 15 years old.  That's a feature of Muslim tradition. Many of the Lemba's clan names sound similar to words in Arabic or Hebrew
 names like Hamesi, Sadiki, Sulamani.  Parfitt is convinced the Lemba must have Semitic ancestors.  But were they Jews?  The DNA analysis may yield a clue. Another stunning result
 the distinctive Cohanim markers appear in the Lemba at the same frequency as they do in the general Jewish population, far more frequently than in any non-Jewish population tested. The Cohen Y chromosome type shows up in the Buba clan about as often as in the Cohanim - in about half the men.  Does that imply the Buba are Cohanim?  What else might explain the frequency of these genetic markers in the Lemba leadership clan?  Perhaps Jewish traders - including members of the priestly class - interbred with Buba women in Africa. Though men from the outside have never been welcome into the Lemba tribe - especially among the Buba. Exactly how and when the Lemba came to carry the Cohanim markers remains uncertain, but locating their place of origin might help fill in the picture.  Parfitt has promised to find the long-lost Lemba homeland - a city somewhere to the north, called Sena - where the Lemba say they lived before coming to Africa. Parfitt may uncover more clues to the Lemba's origins if he can find Sena.  Did Jewish populations live there in the past?   Do today's inhabitants have any genetic similarities to the Lemba or the Cohanim?  His next stop is the village of Sintamule to visit a local expert on Lemba history, William Masala. Based on his biblical dictionary, William Masala places Sena near Jerusalem.  But the Lemba oral tradition is much less specific. The sons of Sena were among thousands of Jews freed by Cyrus, King of Persia, and allowed to return to Jerusalem starting in 538 BC to rebuild the temple the Babylonians had destroyed.  It may be no more than coincidence that this biblical town had the same name as the Lemba homeland, but if the Lemba did come from the Middle East, why did they leave and migrate down into Africa? Perhaps their motivation was trade, centered in the "Great Stone City" of their oral tradition. At its height, Great Zimbabwe is thought to have had 18,000 inhabitants, spread over three square miles - a bustling center of trade. Europeans first described these ruins in detail in the late 19th  century.  Influenced by the racist attitudes of the day, they couldn't imagine that such magnificent structures had been built by black Africans.  Explorers had long dreamed of discovering a lost white civilization in "darkest" Africa, and this, they thought, must be it. The legend of the light-skinned African queen joining forces with the last great king of Israel suited the preconceptions of white colonialists.  But by 1932, a team of women archaeologists from Great Britain proved, through a series of painstaking excavations, that Great Zimbabwe was built - not in biblical times -  but between the 13th and 15th centuries. Parfitt heads east from Great Zimbabwe, through Mozambique, to the coast.  If the Lemba came from the north by sea, the prevailing winds would have brought them here. 500 years ago, Arabian vessels plied the Indian Ocean, part of a vast trading empire.  The monsoon winds were the critical factor in controlling the flow of trade.  During monsoon season, the winds blew down the coast of Africa, and for the rest of the year, the winds reversed.  Perhaps Sena lay at the northern end of the trade route - in the Yemen. Could this city - Sanaa - be the Lemba's Sena?  The Lemba may have roots in the community of Jewish traders who left here for Africa.  But Parfitt thinks it's unlikely, for this bustling city has never had strong traditions of emigration - unlike other parts of the Yemen. Al Sacaf is familiar with a city called Sena - not shown on most maps.  It's in an ancient and undeveloped region of the Hadramaut Valley. Encouraged by this new information, Parfitt asks if the Lemba clan-names sound at all like family names here in the Yemen. The road to Sena passes through desolate, dangerous country -  the scene of several kidnappings in recent months.  Parfitt has arranged for an armed escort. The following day, Parfitt continues on to what he hopes will be the legendary homeland of the Lemba - Sena.  Today Sena is dusty and dry - not the sort of place one would think of as paradise.  But according to local legend, the city once was lush and teeming with life - until its great stone dam cracked, leaving the town without proper irrigation.  About a thousand years ago, people began to leave in great numbers - including, perhaps, the Lemba. Once shrouded in mystery, the Lemba's past is becoming clearer. Parfitt seems convinced he has found Sena - the ancient homeland of their oral tradition.  And the startling genetic discoveries make a plausible case for the Lemba's claim to Jewish ancestry.  But the genes cannot tell us exactly when the Lemba left the Middle East for Africa, nor when they acquired the distinctive Cohanim markers.  The one certainty is that the priestly line of Cohanim began in antiquity, somewhere between 600 and 5,000 years ago.  This is revealed through a  biological clock, calibrated by the slow accumulation of genetic changes, or mutations. Modern genetics seems to confirm the age-old Jewish belief that a paternally-inherited line of priests - the Cohanim - began centuries ago. Possibly even in biblical times.  Other long-held beliefs, however, are beyond the reach of science.  The fate of the 10 lost tribes of Israel, expelled from Judea nearly 3,000 years ago, is so obscured by myth it may never be known - let alone be connected to a group of living people.  But ongoing detective work - both in the lab and in the remote reaches of Africa and the Middle East - will continue to reveal unexpected truths in the legends of ancient peoples.  In a place called the Graveyard of the Atlantic lie the remains of one of America's most famous ships, the USS Monitor.   A team of Navy divers prepares for the treacherous assignment.  For now the seas are calm.  But in an instant conditions can change, putting ship and divers in dire jeopardy.  It's a deep dive, 230 feet to the ocean floor.  Powerful currents and sudden storms are a constant threat. The objective for the first dive is simple.  Find the target. But suddenly the divers run into trouble.  A strong current whips across the bottom.  Visibility plunges. On the surface anxious moments pass. Why risk life and limb to reach this relic of a war fought long ago? Because now the Monitor itself needs saving. In a race against time and the elements, the divers will try to raise the ship piece by piece.  The Navy has come to rescue one of its own.  It is one of the most famous battles in the American Civil War, the Monitor versus the Merrimack.  The first clash between ironclad warships, a pivotal moment in this war and in naval history. John Broadwater is in charge of the marine sanctuary which now protects the Monitor. The Monitor is not only hard to recognize, but being upside down makes it dangerous to work on.  Jagged pieces of metal can easily snag divers.   John Broadwater has enlisted the services of the U.S. Navy's Mobile Diving and Salvage Unit 2.  For these divers, precision archaeology is a completely new line of work. Chris Murray commands this elite Navy dive team.  They brought up the gruesome fragments of TWA flight 800 when it crashed off Long Island.  But conditions there were mild compared to what they now face. Commander Murray knows that at 230 feet his divers are pushing the limits for safety and depth.  The man he places in charge of this difficult operation is Master Diver Donny Denis. Hard-hat diving is as old as diving itself.  There's still no better way to get heavy objects off the bottom. Snaking behind each diver is an umbilical - yellow, green, red.  Red and green diver will go into the water.  Yellow will remain on deck, ready to dive in an emergency.   The umbilical delivers the divers' breathing mix, hot water to keep him warm and a communications link.  Even with all the careful preparation, getting divers over the side is a tense procedure. Once in the water the divers are switched from air to mixed gas. Husky Navy baritones are transformed by helium into Alvin and the Chipmunks. This time conditions don't let up.  Divers are in danger of being swept off the wreck.  Master Diver Denis decides to bring the team up. It takes five men hauling on each umbilical to stop the divers from being swept away by the current. At this depth, the divers can't come straight to the surface.  They must make a series of decompression stops.   The surface team has just minutes to get them into an on-board chamber where they will complete their decompression. It will take an hour and a half to return their bodies to surface pressure. The divers must wait for conditions to improve before they can risk another dive and finally start exploring the Monitor.  Ericsson's drawings translate into a wide variety of projects - canals in his native Sweden, locomotives in Britain. The steam engine developed by the Englishman James Watt achieves the ingenious breakthrough of rotary motion.  The task that John Ericsson sets himself is to harness this power to drive a warship. Angry and maligned, John Ericsson retreats to the sanctuary of his drafting office. A genius to some, a pigheaded purist to others, Ericsson refuses to abandon his vision of a truly modern, steam-powered warship.  The divers start by removing the marine growth from the Monitor's propeller.  But after all the delays they're in too much of a hurry. Over the course of the day, the divers successfully clean off the propeller.    The Navy team assembles a hydraulic dredge to clean out the turret, which is now filled with sand and debris. At first everything goes according to plan.  John Broadwater rendezvous with the two Navy divers.  They start the dredge. But the dredge is too powerful and could destroy whatever's inside the turret.  The divers abandon the attempt. For now the question of the Monitor's guns must remain a mystery. But it was heavy guns like these that created the need for iron warships. In 1860 the British Navy responds to this threat by building a huge new warship, the HMS Warrior.  Its hull is built entirely of iron.  And its main gun deck is further protected by 4 and a half inches of wrought iron armor.  Yet it still looks like a sailing ship.  Ericsson, true to form, takes a completely different approach. Ericsson's answer is the Monitor.  It's so unlike anything else he doesn't even call it a ship.  Instead he calls it "a sub-aquatic system of naval warfare."  It's the beginning of a new era. But the Confederates strike back, seizing the nation's most well-equipped shipyard at Norfolk, Virginia.  Retreating Union forces scuttle and burn several ships.  One of them is the steam frigate, USS Merrimac.  In the workshop of the Navy's model ship collection at the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Colan Ratliff examines plans for the Merrimac, the same plans that Confederate engineers begin pouring over in the early summer of 1861. Searching for a way to break the Northern blockade, the engineers hit upon an ingenious idea. With sloping armored sides, the Merrimack is transformed and renamed the Virginia. Scrambling for an iron ship of its own, the Navy turns to the man it has so long rejected.  John Ericsson suddenly finds himself with a contract to build the Monitor. Several of the iron plates with which Ericsson built his ship so rapidly have come loose.  When the deckplates are hoisted on board, their condition sends a chill through John Broadwater.   136 years ago these rusty remnants were state of the art technology. For the first time in naval history, the whole crew lives below the waterline.  With an eye on future Navy business, Ericsson furnishes the officers' quarters lavishly at his own expense.  He also installs more than 40 patentable devices, including a forced-air ventilation system and the first flushing toilets on a ship. William Keeler, the ship's paymaster, is immediately impressed.  To his wife, he writes "Yesterday, I saw my iron home for the first time." At times the two ships are just feet apart.  Each fires more than 20 accurate shots. But neither can pierce the other's armor.  After four hours, the two ships finally disengage, leaving no doubt that the future of war at sea belongs to iron ships. The effect on the Civil War is no less decisive. Like their predecessors who fought in the Monitor, these Navy divers sense that their moment has come.  Commander Murray prepares his team for the expedition's greatest challenge. The Navy team is now committed to a single objective
  recovering the Monitor's propeller.   The early dives go without a hitch. The first team positions a saw on the propeller's wrought-iron shaft. Another team attaches the nylon sling and liftbag that will bring the propeller to the surface.    But as they return to the ship, there's trouble.  One diver has reacted badly to the switch to pure oxygen.  Master Diver Denis orders them back onto air.  The pure oxygen used to speed up the decompression process has caused the diver's heart to race.  He could go into convulsions. Once in the chamber, both divers will go through the decompression process all over again. The incident has everyone on edge. Ninety minutes later diver Dowell emerges safely from the recompression chamber. And the incident has produced a hero. Despite near disaster, the team goes right back to work. At last the divers are blessed with near perfect conditions.  But they've never encountered 100 year-old wrought iron before.  There's no room for error. 5 dives are the most they've have done in day.  Today they've already done 6. And a half-cut shaft could jeopardize the whole propeller. It's time for a dramatic move. Running short of divers, Commander Murray takes a gamble. He decides to send 20-year veteran, Master Diver Donny Denis to the bottom.   If any one can make the cut in one dive he can. John Broadwater too heads back into the water. So the salvage veteran and the archaeologist head down together, each hoping this will be the decisive dive. They extend the dive from 30 to 40 minutes.  It's risky at this depth.  And still the work isn't done.  Commander Murray has only himself now to finish the job.  John Broadwater and Commander Murray have been planning this expedition for months.  Now everything hinges on one critical dive. Since dawn Commander Chris Murray has been sending his men over the side.  Seven sets of divers in all.  It's more than anyone can remember in a single day.  For the eighth time the stage is ready to go over the side.  Everyone prays that the notorious currents will remain slack for just one more dive. When the divers hit bottom, they find the job almost done.  A sudden surge has snapped the last few inches of the shaft. They call for the cable attached to the propeller to be raised. With just a slow tug on the winch the Monitor's historic propeller finally comes free. Darkness arrives quickly and with it a sudden storm. Meanwhile the propeller hangs in the dark ocean below.  Like some strange leviathan hooked from the deep. As preparations get underway to receive the propeller, there's still no guarantee of success.   For the first time in 136 years the Monitor's propeller breaks the surface.  But then the cable starts to swing. The newly freed propeller threatens to dash itself against the ship that has come to save it. But a sobered crew quickly attaches more tending lines.     For the entire team, it's a moment to savor. And all names are erased from the wall of shame The Monitor becomes an instant legend following its stunning success at Hampton Roads.  Would this be the fate of the original Monitor and her crew?  In December 1862, while being towed South, she runs into a storm off Cape Hatteras. In the early morning hours of December 31st, 1862, the Monitor with about a dozen men on board slips beneath the waves.  The stern weighed down by the engine and other machinery strikes the bottom first.   The Final Solution and the slaughter of millions of Jews during World War II is the defining tragedy of the 20th century.  But there are those who claim that the Holocaust is a myth - that the millions who died are mere phantoms, that the few who survived are liars.  Today, more than 50 years after those terrible events, the very reality of the Holocaust is being challenged. What began as a libel case will become a trial of the Holocaust itself.                                                       Irving insists that he is not a denier of the Holocaust, but simply an historian who has asked awkward questions.  He challenges 3 key aspects of the Holocaust
 Irving has argued that there was no systematic plan to exterminate the Jews; that there is no proof that Hitler ordered a policy of extermination; and that no Jews were killed in gas chambers at Auschwitz.   David Irving has become a hero of far right groups around the world. As this footage played in the court shows, he has spoken to neo-Nazi rallies, where he has challenged the historical record of the Third Reich and the Final Solution. In his 30-year journey from controversial historian to alleged Holocaust denier, Irving has cast himself at the center of a bitter drama, marked by fines, arrests and deportations. In 1977, Irving published Hitler's War which established his reputation with a wide popular audience.  In the book, he accepted the historic reality of the Holocaust; but he argued that there was no documentary proof that Adolf Hitler had ordered the Final Solution.	 Irving was deported from Canada, refused entry to Australia and threatened with arrest in Germany.  But as a skilled publicist for his views, he has become the most notorious historian of the Third Reich, and the most effective spokesman for the revision of the Nazi record. Today, a determined campaign in Europe and America echoes Irving's belief that the historical record of the Final Solution is a lie, orchestrated by the international Jewish lobby. The defense insist that Irving's work as a scholar has been warped by his politics.  Central to their case is their attempt to portray him as a racist. To emphasize Irving's right-wing connections, the defense show a video of a speech he gave to the National Alliance, an American right-wing political group.  He is recounting his response to a Jewish questioner at one of his meetings. Irving has never sought to deny that anti-Semitism was at the heart of Hitler's ideology.  "In standing guard against the Jew," Hitler wrote, "I am defending the handiwork of the Lord."  Irving has also never hidden his admiration for Hitler. One of Irving's central challenges to the generally accepted view of the Holocaust is that there is no documentary evidence that Hitler planned or ordered it.  For years, Irving has been offering a thousand dollars to anyone who can produce a document. The trial will follow in detail the developing stages of the Final Solution.  Seven months before the outbreak of World War II, Hitler spelled out the nightmare awaiting the Jews. With the German invasion of Poland and the beginning of the Second World War the ominous threat delivered by Hitler against the Jews was to become real. The Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 signaled the launch of a new and more savage stage of the Final Solution.  The German army high command had been instructed to prepare for a brutal conflict of ideology and racial opposition.  Hitler insisted that the struggle would have to be conducted "with unprecedented, unmerciful and unrelenting harshness." Irving claims the Einsatzgruppen massacres of up to 1.5 million victims were arbitrary actions by criminal individuals.   In October 1941, the first deportations of German Jews to the East took place.  Although the Nazis were murdering thousands of Soviet Jews, it was not yet a matter of policy to kill Jews from their own country.  With America, which was seen by Hitler as a Jewish-controlled nation, still not in the War, the Nazis had a powerful reason to preserve the German Jews.   A mansion near a lake south of Berlin is accepted by most historians to be the place where the organization of the Final Solution was planned. On January 20 1942, Reinhard Heydrich, Chief of the Nazi Security Service summoned a meeting of 15 Nazi functionaries, including Adolf Eichmann, to gather here.  The entry of America into the War in December 1941 meant that the bureaucrats were gathering to discuss how best to fulfil Hitler's prophesy of the extermination of all 11 million Jews in Europe.   Irving disputes what happened at Wannsee.  The transcript of the meeting, he insists, contains no reference to 'liquidation' or to Hitler's approval.  It was, he says, a low-level conference concerned with a shift in Nazi policy towards the Jews from deportation overseas to evacuation to the East. Moreover, Eichmann said, the Wannsee Conference was in fact a high-level meeting of a wide range of Senior Officials to plan the implementation of the Final Solution of the Jewish Question in Europe. Early in 1942, the Final Solution of the Jewish Question entered a new and more lethal phase with the introduction of a technology of mass slaughter. Gassing technology had been developed as part of the Nazi program of euthanasia, directed against mentally and physically handicapped people, and claiming 70,000 lives.  Now it was to be used against the Jews. In the summer of 1942, the ultimate stage of the Final Solution began to unfold
 the use of Hydrogen Cyanide -  Zyklon B - in the Gas Chambers of Polish extermination centers.  Some camps, like Auschwitz, were large complexes - part slave labor camp.  Others, like Treblinka, Sobibor and Belzec, were designed purely as factories of death.  But whatever their destination, Jews who were sent to the camps were not expected to survive. Central to Irving's revisionist claims about the Holocaust is his belief is that there were no homicidal gas chambers in Auschwitz.  He claims that the gas chambers were a piece of atrocity propaganda invented by the British Political Warfare Executive; and he insists that all eye-witnesses are liars.  The reason for his rejection for the gas chambers in Auschwitz can be described in one word - Leuchter. Self-styled gas chamber "expert", Fred Leuchter, shot to notoriety in 1988 at the trial in Canada of Holocaust denier, Ernst Zundel. At Zundel's request,  Leuchter went to Auschwitz to test for hydrogen cyanide deposits both in a chamber used to de-louse clothing and in Crematorium 2, the largest of the 4 main gas chambers at Auschwitz-Birkenau. Leuchter concluded that Crematorium 2 could not have been used as a Homicidal Gas Chamber.  For Irving, it was a decisive moment.  He pronounced himself entirely converted by Leuchter and even published a glossy version of the report in June 1989. Leuchter's methods and his conclusions have been totally discredited.  Irving accepts this, but continues to use the report to back his denials of the gas chambers.   The SS abandoned Auschwitz in January 1945 shortly before the advancing Red Army reached the camp. A document of October 2, 1942, requests a supply from the manufacturers  of Zyklon B gas, calling it "material for resettlement of Jews". In the blueprints for Crematorium 2, the gas chamber was always referred to as Leichenkeller 1 - the underground 'mortuary'. In re-examination for the defense, Richard Rampton produces the patent application for the Topf ovens supplied to Auschwitz for incineration purposes. The ruins of Crematorium 2 at Auschwitz are the ultimate focus of the struggle in the courtroom.  It is at this place that Irving's denials must confront the evidence that half a million people were systematically exterminated here.	 The complex of buildings which made up Crematorium 2 has been meticulously studied by defense witness Professor Van Pelt.  Based on his research, it is possible now to reconstruct the horrifying details of a factory of death.   After 31 days, David Irving lost his libel action.  Deborah Lipstadt's defense had cost 3 million dollars.  In his verdict, The Honorable Mr. Justice Gray said
 In the dark of night, a team of divers prepares for a dangerous expedition. Their journey will take them 60 miles offshore and a half century back in time. These divers have been exploring shipwrecks off the coast for years, but they've never heard of any submarine at this location. Not knowing how old the wreck is, or what nationality, they report it to the US Navy. What began with a fisherman's accident now starts these divers on a journey through the dark history of World War II. When they're through, part of the record of the 20th century's worst war will stand corrected, and families around the world will finally learn the truth about their lost loved ones. In December, 1941, German submarines U-boats depart on a secret mission. They cross the Atlantic undetected, and take up positions a few miles off the East Coast. Their target is the United States. Horst von Schroeter is Watch Officer on U-123.  	The German plan is code-named "Paukenschlag," or "Drumbeat." It calls for an all-out surprise attack on American merchant ships. At war for barely a month, few suspect German U-boats are lurking within sight of shore. The attack begins January 13, 1942. America is completely unprepared. January is just the beginning. The US Navy assures the public it has the U-boats under control. In 1942, at the height of Operation Drumbeat, the German U-boat seems almost unstoppable. But was this machine as effective as it seemed?  For six years, the group of divers that discovered the wreck has been trying to learn which U-boat it is. The team leader is professional diver John Chatterton. John's partners are Richard Kohler, a businessman, and John Yurga, also a professional diver. Every summer, these divers come here and search for artifacts, hoping one will identify the wreck. During the winters, they read and study blueprints, learning details about U-boats that will guide their diving. They do this work not for money, but out of stubborn curiosity. After six years, they still have no answer. The questions are simple, but finding answers means overcoming enormous obstacles. Every trip to the wreck takes eight hours. The divers leave at midnight to arrive by dawn. They average a half-dozen trips every summer. Their bodies can only tolerate two dives a day, and no more than 30 minutes on the bottom. At this depth, any mistake can be fatal.  Whitehead originally intends his torpedo to be launched from tubes on land. But this underwater guided missile turns out to be the perfect weapon for the stealthy submarine. In Germany, the commander of U-9, Otto Weddigen, becomes a new kind of hero
 the daring submariner, who can bring down the mighty British with this marvelous new machine. One of thousands of young Germans mesmerized by the exploits of Weddigen is Erich Topp. Weddigen's success is especially remarkable given the primitive nature of his vessel. U-9 is not very stealthy. Its engines emit clouds of smoke that can be seen for miles. It takes seven minutes to dive just 30 feet. But it only needs a crew of 24. And any weapon that lets 24 men take down thousands of the enemy is hard to resist. Germany quickly capitalizes on this unexpected success. By concentrating ships into a few large groups, convoys empty the oceans. Most U-boats now go days without spotting a target. If a U-boat does find a convoy, when it attacks it reveals its position to the escorts. After three years of war, the British finally adopt the convoy system. It is a smashing success. In 1917, U-boats sink 3,000 ships; in 1918, only 134 ships are lost in convoys. When Germany surrenders, the Allies confiscate all her U-boats. But as the world celebrates peace, one U-boat captain is sitting in a British prison camp, planning a response to the convoy. His name is Karl Dönitz, and he is already preparing for another submarine war. In less than twenty years the U-boat will be reborn. And once again, thousands of sailors on both sides will die in watery graves. Nor do German records mention any U-boat lost here. The identity of this boat will have to be found in the wreck itself. By the end of their first season the divers have learned little.Over the winter, they gather information to better focus their search. A U-boat veteran suggests looking for an escape lung—an emergency breathing device used to leave a sunken submarine. U-boat sailors often wrote their names on their escape lungs and a name might help identify the wreck. In dive after dive they sift through the debris and locate several escape lungs. The escape lungs prove disappointing. By now, the divers have been through most of the wreck without result. But there are two crucial areas they have yet to search. The electric motor room may hold the key. The divers have learned that boxes of spare parts stored here were often marked with tags bearing the U-boat's number. But reaching the electric motor room means passing through the diesel room. And the divers learned early on that the diesel motor room is perhaps the most dangerous place in the wreck. Having exhausted all other possibilities, the divers feel they have no choice. They will attempt the dangerous passage into the e-motor room. The plan is to enter the hatch, pass between the diesel motors, and continue into the electric motor room. At last the divers have a clue that narrows the field. For this wreck to be a Type IX is not surprising. The Type IX was a long range boat, used to patrol distant waters—off Africa or America. It is designed in the 1930s, as Germany starts to rearm. To overcome convoys Dönitz will use group attacks. Large numbers of U-boats will silently stalk convoys by day and swarm in at night for the kill. Dönitz calls this "the wolfpack." But Hitler doesn't wait for the boats to be built. On September 1, 1939, Hitler invades Poland. Two days later, England declares war on Germany. It takes a lot of nerve to attack on the surface. But Dönitz hammers home his message
 the way to win is to be daring. The U-boat men call this "the Happy Time."  A desperate Winston Churchill turns to America. The US Navy begins escorting British convoys carrying vital supplies. Six months before Pearl Harbor, America is fighting an undeclared war against the U-boats. He fires a torpedo at what he assumes to be a British destroyer. But the destroyer Topp has sunk is the USS Reuben James—technically, a neutral ship. It is a mistake Topp will never forget. Topp's tragic error might have had grave political repercussions. But five weeks later it doesn't matter. America enters the war anyway. Two days after the Japanese attack Pearl Harbor, Hitler declares war on the US without consulting his navy. Dönitz has only five U-boats available. But he wants to attack as quickly as possible, before the Americans have a chance to organize convoys. But weeks become months, and still there are no convoys. As the sinkings mount, the British press the US to protect its coastal shipping with convoys. But Navy commander Admiral Ernest King refuses. With a two-ocean war to fight and much of his fleet sunk at Pearl Harbor, King simply doesn't have enough escort ships. Defending cargo ships isn't King's only problem. He also has to worry about American troops sailing for England. Even as U-boats are sinking hundreds of merchant ships, the navy escorts over 150,000 American troops across the Atlantic. Not one is lost. By May, five months after Operation Drumbeat began, King finally has enough escort ships to begin coastal convoys. The U-boats pull back into the Atlantic. Drumbeat is the U-boats' greatest victory of the entire war, but in the end it accomplishes little. Never again will large groups of U-boats attack the US. But until the last day of the war, single boats continue to come right up to our doorstep—lone wolves on the prowl. While down at the wreck one of the divers, Steve Feldman, becomes unconscious and is swept away. Breathing air at extreme depths can cause confusion, called "narcosis," as well as seizures. There is an alternative called "trimix"—a blend of nitrogen, helium and less oxygen than air. But trimix is untested in recreational diving. For safety reasons, the divers experiment with trimix. But they quickly discover safety is not its only benefit. Better vision and longer dives make a difference. Searching the crew's quarters, John Chatterton discovers what appears to be an ordinary table knife. But on closer look, it seems he may have found exactly what they have been looking for. At last the divers have learned the identity of a crewman. Someone on the mystery U-boat was named Horenburg. Whoever Horenburg may have been, he was one of 45,000 men who served in U-boats. Allied propaganda portrayed them as fanatical Nazis, but this was more myth than reality. Most were in their teens or early twenties, and had started out full of romantic notions of adventure at sea. Not all were volunteers. But theirs was a service with a mystique. Newsreels made with actual combat footage were used to glorify the U-boats. But the newsreels never told the terrible truth about the odds of survival. Nearly 70% of the men who went to sea in U-boats died in them. Some 28,000 men shared the same fate as Horenburg. To learn more about Horenburg, John and Richie travel to Germany. They take their evidence to the U-boat Archive in Altenbruch, run by U-boat veteran Horst Bredow Bredow's archive is the most complete source of information in the world concerning Germany's U-boats and the men who sailed them. Bredow's records include a file on each boat, as well as a list of all the men who died in U-boats. Remarkably, Bredow finds there was only one man named Horenburg in the entire U-boat service. His first name was Martin. It turns out that Martin Horenburg served on several U-boats. The boat he died on was U-869. But according to Bredow 869 cannot be the mystery wreck. The record shows that U-869 was sunk off North Africa, near the entrance to the Mediterranean Sea. What seemed to be the most promising of leads has been no help at all.  The more the divers learn about this wreck, the more enigmatic it becomes. Aside from its identity, one of the most puzzling questions is how it met its end. To find out more about what might have sunk the U-boat, John Chatterton shows a videotape of the damage to US Navy underwater demolition experts. According to the Navy, depth charges would not cause damage this severe. They suggest the boat was sunk by something more powerful than a depth charge—perhaps a torpedo. But whose torpedo? If a U-boat crew suspected their own torpedo was circling back, their only hope for escape would be an emergency dive. To make an 1100-ton boat vanish, a complex series of events must unfold with precise timing. In the diesel motor room, the crew shuts off the diesels and closes the air intakes. Now the electric motors take over. For the scuba diver, submerging is also complex. As with a U-boat, diving and surfacing require careful precise timing. Inside the wreck, something goes terribly wrong. He remains trapped for nearly 30 minutes. Then his father goes in looking for him. But by now they are running out of air and they cannot locate their spare tanks. But a diver at 230 feet cannot just surface. Under pressure, his breathing forces more gas into his body than it can hold on the surface. At depth, his blood is now like the soda in an unopened bottle. In their panic the father and son come up without decompressing. Their bodies are still saturated with inert gas. No longer under pressure, this gas begins bubbling out of their blood. Three divers have now died on the U-boat. John Yurga is starting to wonder if the risk of continuing is simply too great. The following week, John and Richie go back to the wreck to shoot video and analyze what went wrong. The tragedy brings another dive season to a close. Over the winter the team will regroup. Three more years of diving and research follow. But still they are no closer to finding the answer. Each has his own reason for continuing. For Richie, it is a sense of responsibility to the families of the lost crew. But for John Chatterton, it is the challenge of solving the mystery, finishing what he has begun. Now, in the spring of 1997, John Chatterton comes up with a daring plan to get into the electric motor room, where there may be boxes of spare parts that can identify the U-boat. Tomorrow morning, John Chatterton, with thousands of hours underwater, will make the most dangerous dive of his life. If John's plan works, he will soon enter a place unseen and untouched since the day the U-boat sank. Finally, John appears. Pinned down by a piece of wreckage, John is lucky to escape with his life. The next morning, John tries again. With John past the obstruction, Richie hands him the camera. After six years, and three deaths, the divers have finally identified the mystery wreck
 U-869. One of America's most important resources is science. At universities and research centers scientific teams are developing new technologies to hunt U-boats. One focus of the scientific effort is radar. Since the 1930s, German scientists have also been working on radar. Though aware of this work, Dönitz fails to appreciate the magnitude of the threat. Beyond radar, Dönitz's greatest miscalculation is his obsessive use of radio. He sends some boats as many as 70 messages a day. The constant radio traffic exposes the U-boats to Allied high-frequency direction finding, or "huff duff." If a U-boat uses its radio, huff duff can pinpoint its position, using triangulation. Together, radar and huff duff force the U-boats to submerge. And a submerged U-boat is too slow to catch a target. It is also too slow to escape. The ships above are hunting it with sound. All the men can do is remain silent. When an escort locates a U-boat the depth-charging begins. Slowly, but inexorably, the Allies are gaining the upper hand. The turning point comes in a single month the U-boat men will forever remember as "Black May." Coming back is getting harder and harder to do. Even at night or in dense fog, an airplane with radar can detect a U-boat on the surface. Strangely, U-boat Command has long ignored a Dutch device that allows a submarine to remain submerged. The schnorkel is a mast that can be raised like a periscope. It sucks fresh air into the boat for the diesels and the crew, and vents poisonous exhaust out. A true submarine has long been the dream of Professor Hellmuth Walter. Since the 1930s, he has been working on a turbine that runs off hydrogen peroxide, H2O2. Since this fuel contains its own oxygen, the engine needs no outside air. For underwater speed, he uses a highly streamlined hull. But the Type 21s aren't ready until the last week of the war. The Type 21 U-boat will redefine the future of the submarine. But it has no effect on the outcome of the war for which it is designed. In the end, the German U-boat is decisively defeated. Still, the U-boat threat has tied down Allied resources in the Atlantic that could otherwise bring the war to Germany. To satisfy Hitler, the U-boat crews are deliberately sacrificed. In the closing months of the war, the life expectancy of a U-boat man is barely 60 days, yet Dönitz keeps sending them out. But even the most optimistic U-boat man might have hesitated to go out had he known the greatest secret of the U-boat war. The Allies have broken the German code. By decoding Dönitz's radio messages, they know where each U-boat is headed even before it gets there. Some U-boat commanders suspect the Allies are reading their messages, but they cannot convince Dönitz. The Allied codebreaking, called Ultra, is one of the greatest secrets of World War II. At the time, Ultra enabled ASW forces to track and hunt down individual U-boats. Today, Ultra can help NOVA piece together the story of U-869's last patrol. U-boat Command is now expecting 869 to arrive off Gibraltar by February 1st. But she never acknowledges her new orders. The codebreakers wonder if perhaps 869 missed the signal, and is continuing to her original assignment off New York. Bredow is not easily convinced. He has a hard time believing his records are wrong. Half a century after she vanished without a trace, the final resting place of U-869 is now a matter of record. But questions about U-869 linger. Why she missed the message redirecting her to Gibraltar and what caused her to sink will always remain mysteries. Seaman Otto Brizius would have had his twentieth birthday in February, 1945, right around the time that 869 sank. Otto is picked for the U-boats when he is barely seventeen. He never returns. The family is told only that Otto was lost off Gibraltar. That is what Barbara still believes. Out of the 57 men assigned to U-869, one was saved by a twist of fate. For most of us, World War II exists only in photographs and moving pictures, distant in time and place. But the cost of the war is still being paid today...by survivors..by relatives of those who lost their lives...by those who were only children at the time...and by some who were not even born when the storm was raging. Hidden in the mists of the South Pacific on one of the most remote islands on earth is a mystery locked in stone.  Giant human forms stand against the weathering of time.  These are the mute sentinels of Easter Island, stone statues called moai.  Roughly 900 moai were carved over a period of 500 years, hewn with stone tools from the volcanic rock of an ancient crater.  No one knows how the many ton statues came to stand at their sacred sites.  How could an isolated culture with only the simplest tools move monoliths from the quarry to sacred platform sites scattered all over the island - some of them five miles away?  Legend says the statues magically walked to their venerated platforms.  To penetrate beyond the myths, NOVA assembles a team of archaeologists, engineers, and the Easter Islanders themselves.  Together they launch a series of hands-on experiments to explore the methods used by the ancients.  But no one anticipates the events that unfold. Ideas clash. Tensions escalate as new methods are presented. Resources run out, just as they did in ancient times. This is the legacy of Easter Island, a culture that exhausted itself in moving giant stone.  How did this ancient society achieve such monolithic greatness?  And why did it fall? Around 400 AD, Polynesian voyagers set out across the open sea in search of new land.  It is believed they sailed a large double canoe made of wood and rope lashings.  Their journey took them thousands of miles across the Pacific until, by chance, they came upon the rugged coastline of a solitary, uninhabited island.  Easter Island, now known as "Rapa Nui."  Today, treeless, wind-swept land rises from an infinite sea.  Just seven miles across, Easter Island is studded with volcanic craters which provide the raw material for the stone sculptures of the past.  For 1200 years, the island culture thrived in isolation.  The population may have reached as much as 10,000.  It was a closed society.  As far as is known, nobody came to the island, and nobody ever left.  There was no recorded history, and all that remains is a thin thread of oral tradition that has passed down through generations.  We do know the ancient islanders feverishly expressed themselves in stone.  According to island folklore, the moai are the spirits of powerful ancestors.  They were raised on platforms, called "ahu," which were the centers for ancestral worship among the island's clans.  But as population grew on the tiny island, conflict erupted between the clans.  Food and timber were scarce.  The people stripped the landscape of its once abundant trees.  Today only thin soils and exposed pastures survive.  Could it be that this remote civilization ultimately destroyed itself over the moving and raising of their sacred moai?  For decades theorists have come to the island to try their hand at moving moai.  In 1955, Norwegian archaeologist Thor Heyerdahl tried to drag a nine ton moai on a small tree fork over the ground.  The pulling method worked, but dragging a heavy statue is likely to damage the carved stone.  Heyerdahl returned in 1986, inspired by Rapa Nui folklore.  Legends say that the human statues walked across the island to their ahu platforms through a spiritual power called "mana."  Heyerdahl tried walking the nine ton statue by rocking it forward like a refrigerator.  Although it works, the method is precarious on anything but level terrain.   Thousands of tourists come to gaze upon the stone giants and wonder how the Rapa Nui people moved and erected them.  Dr. Claudio Cristino has been Easter Island's resident archaeologist for the past 20 years. He takes Wyoming architect Vince Lee to the largest ahu on the island.  It was one of the ceremonial centers on the east coast.  In 1960, a tidal wave struck the ahu and washed the 15 massive moai inland.  Claudio was in charge of restoring the site. Vince's expertise is Inca stone work.  He has explored how the Incas moved heavy stones, and is intrigued by Rapa Nui ingenuity. Even Vince and Claudio have trouble imagining how an ancient culture could have carved, transported, and erected such mighty stones without the aid of modern technology. Archaeologist Jo Anne Van Tilburg is here to test her theory of how the moai were moved.  For 15 years she has searched for the cultural significance encoded in the moai. But with no written record left behind, and only limited clues from archaeology, the question of how the Easter Islanders moved their moai remains elusive. Jo Anne has measured the height, width, and estimated weight of each moai on Easter Island.  Her inventory of measurements created a digital model of a statistically average moai.  The computer data helps Jo Anne and robotics expert Zvi Shiller formulate their theory on how the ancients moved the statues.  By digitizing a topographical map of Easter Island, Zvi simulates the undulating terrain.  This virtual fly-through shows them a view of the island from the perspective of a moai in transit. From this digital model, a full scale replica will be made for experiments on the island.  Jo Anne proposes laying the statue on a triangular shaped sled and then pulling the moai and sled over logs that roll along wood tracks.  Our team of experts has gathered on the island to put their theories to the test. They will first try Jo Anne's log roller method. Claudio will be in charge of raising the moai. Vince is the only member of the group who has explored how another ancient culture, the Incas, moved heavy stone. While engineer Zvi Shiller has simulated moai transportation on his computer, he's here to see if his solutions will work in the real world. Rafael Rapu, a Rapa Nui sculptor, will be the foreman for the project.  Jo Anne's architect husband, Jan, demonstrates Jo Anne's moai moving method.  A triangular A-frame sled will be placed on logs that will roll over rails. They have their method.  Now they need a moai.  A concrete mixture of sand and stone from the island is poured into a fiberglass mold scaled up from Jo Anne's digital model.  It is as close as the team can get to using a moai without risking damage to an actual statue.  Three days later the nine and a half ton concrete moai is ready to be lifted out of its curing pit. Even with the aid of a crane, the moai is an unwieldy object. Chain saw surgery frees the moai from its fiberglass mask.  From a digital computer image to a concrete facsimile, this moai is the culmination of years of Jo Anne's research. More than half of Easter Island's moai are still at the quarry, known as Rano Raraku.  It is a mountain of hardened volcanic ash. Here, the moai lie in various stages of production
 some half carved, some on their backs, as if sliding down the quarry slope, and others buried from carving debris and erosion.  Rafael Rapu comes from a long line of Rapa Nui carvers.  He takes local sculptor Santi Hito to the high slopes of the quarry to explain the techniques used by the ancient carvers.  They sculpted moai from the bedrock using a stone tool called a "toki."  The largest moai on the island, named "El Gigante," the giant, was never finished.  Its partially-carved figure provides a glimpse into how the moai were carved. Continuing the tradition of Rapa Nui master carvers, Rafael passes on the oral history to Santi. Rafael explains that first, channels were carved around the body of a moai. The channels reached around and eventually formed a boat-like keel until the statue could be snapped off and fully extracted. At the base of the quarry slope, the moai were erected in prepared holes so the carving could be finished. The replica moai is brought in by truck and crane to the transport site.  A traditional Polynesian ceremony, called an "umu tahu," is held.  The priest's blessing acknowledges that working around a multi-ton statue can be dangerous. Jo Anne's A-frame sled is ready for the moai.  Its unique triangular shape is proportioned exactly for the statue.  The team will try to pull the entire rig 100 yards on flat terrain using Jo Anne's log roller system.  The logs should roll over this track of thin wood rails. Jo Anne confers with Niko Haoa, who is in charge of the Rapa Nui pulling team.  He rehearses his commands before they begin. Surprisingly, the logs don't roll.  They slide over the rails. The hardest part is overcoming the inertia of nine and a half tons.  Then, the sled slides easily.  This novel solution exploits rope lashings and wood crossbeams that are common in traditional Polynesian culture. The people of the Pacific are intimately tied to the ocean.  In ancient times, outrigger canoes were the vital link between islands.  The outriggers have two beams that extend from the side of the canoe to prevent it from capsizing.  The larger voyaging canoes were simply two hulls bound together by wood crossbeams and rope lashings.  Jo Anne's theory is that the same sea-going technology was used for transporting moai across land. The Polynesians made wooden ladders to aid in carrying canoes up on shore.  The crossbeams of this ladder are lashed onto long rails, just like the rollers lashed to the sled for the moai. Each group of statues was raised on a long rectangular platform - or ahu.  According to island belief, the ahu elevate the ancestral spirits part way between earth and sky.  Most ahu platforms are along the coast.  The moai face inland, their backs to the sea.  To have the moai facing inland on its ahu, the team resorts to modern machinery.  Now they have to reposition the statue face down and then rotate it 180 degrees.  Vince explains why. Now repositioned face down, the moai is rotated, but not with the tools of the ancients. Vince wonders how the islanders moved the giant statues up to the ahu platforms that line the coast.  He doubts Jo Anne's pulling method, since there is no space for long lines of people on ropes behind the high ahu platforms. Vince has been given one day, a half-carved stone of Rafael's, and a few leftover materials to put his new idea to practice.  His sled is designed for levering a moai forward when there is no room for long lines of people pulling on ropes. The crossbeams act as leverage points for the men to push against. Vince's side experiment is beginning to raise the temperature and turn the archaeologists and engineers from critics to advocates of their own theories. Could similar arguments have divided the ancient stone movers? And did the early islanders fight over the politics of moving sacred stone?  During the 1600s, life on Easter Island was in crisis.  The island had become overpopulated with thousands of people, all competing for the dwindling supply of food.  Warfare broke out.  And in the ensuing power struggle, there was growing rivalry to carve larger statues to appropriate the spiritual power of "mana." Resources were quickly disappearing.  The last precious trees were cut down, as the demand for timber to raise and transport moai escalated. Ancestral statues were knocked down by the warring factions.  In time, the population would all but disappear.  The great civilization of Easter Island had collapsed.  A fallen moai lies beside a stone ramp leading to an ahu platform.  Claudio walks along the back wall.  This ahu, abandoned in mid construction, shows how the islanders moved their moai onto the elevated platforms. Ramps were made from the limitless supply of lava rock scattered all over the island.  Ascending the stone incline, a moai would finally arrive at its high pedestal stone, which often overlooked the sea. At the beginning of another day of testing Jo Anne's moai transport theories, Vince surveys the ramp that was made for the experiments. Today's goal will be to transport the moai up the ramp which is paved with laterally placed logs.  They start on flat terrain in front of the ramp.  More logs are brought in and placed in position like the ties of a trackless railroad bed.  It takes a lot of trees to make a wood road just 30 yards in length.  It seems plausible that the trees of the island could disappear altogether in the act of moving sacred stone.  Thick palm forests blanketed the island when the first settlers arrived.  Pollen analysis shows that a species of palm, strong enough to move moai, called jubea chilensis, once flourished here.  In their escalating efforts to move and raise giant statues, the islanders cut down the last of their trees.  Long before the first Europeans arrived in 1726, the island had been stripped bare. Not one jubea chilensis palm tree remains today.  Could it have been the obsession with erecting giant statues that led to Easter Island's ecological and social catastrophe?   The next day the team faces the challenge of moving the moai the last six feet to the pedestal stone.  Jo Anne's team will now test a different method that gives extra mechanical advantage to the moai movers. The team has been reduced to 20 people. With a smaller workforce, it has taken an entire day to move the final six feet.  The last few days of experiments have led Jo Anne to conclude that there may have been more than one method for moving moai. Many moai on Easter Island had top knots, known as "pukao," placed on their heads.  They are thought to signify the headdresses that Rapa Nui chiefs wore.  Red cylindrical pukao lie near the fallen moai all over the island, and they were carved from this ancient quarry of red scoria stone. Rafael carves an authentic pukao for the replica moai.  He uses a basalt toki, the tool used by the ancient sculptors to carve island stone.  Rafael passes on the age-old technique to Santi. Rapa Nui society supported specialist craftsmen.  The master carvers held an elevated status in the community. The team must now figure out how to raise the moai.  They use levers to lift the load inch by inch while stones are carefully placed underneath.  Slowly the moai will be jacked up to a vertical position.  The pukao is now ready to be added to the load.  Not all moai had pukao, and we don't know how the islanders raised them onto the statues.  The Rapa Nui men devise a simple pulley system for rolling the one ton pukao up the short ramp. Pukao and moai will now be joined together by rope and secured for the raising. Claudio is the archaeologist in charge of the raising.  He hopes the moai will be raised in one day. The work takes on its own rhythm.  And a steady stream of ideas come from the onlooking experts.  The pile of rocks jacking up the moai gradually grows higher.  Zvi measures the team's progress by calculating the moai's angle of incline. They are using the same instrument, but somehow cannot agree on the angle. With a growing rock pile to clamber over, the men find the work tricky and the moai unstable.  Zvi becomes even more interested in their rate of progress. There are now fewer levering positions on the 12-foot pile of rocks for the 20-man workforce.  They must all find a place on just three levers.  And with the daylight fading, the work will have to continue in the morning. The work is soon stopped.  Zvi's obsession with the angle gets beyond Claudio's patience.  It is a simple misunderstanding.  Great efforts will often bring out great passions.  Time, effort, and resources are all at play in this arena of larger-than-life stone-moving.  It is a delicate moment that must be played out with brute force.  Claudio and Rafael watch for signs of twisting. We may never know how the moai were moved or raised, but by a revealing stroke of fate the methods tested here have taught us as much about ourselves as about the ancient Rapa Nui. For millennia, China marched to a different drummer from the rest of the world.  Often reaching its own solution to a common problem - using chopsticks for eating, and simplified pictures for writing.  Bridge building is yet another example.  The Chinese invented suspension bridges using iron chains 1400 years before the Europeans. Until the experts can get inside the heads of the ancient builders, all that's coming out of theirs is hot air. In a land laced with waterways, China's bridges were created out of necessity.  But they grew into a glorious union of engineering and art with the power to still stir the emotions. Surrounded by mountains, oceans and deserts, China's vast empire was separated from the rest of the world throughout much of her history.  The Italian merchant Marco Polo was the first foreigner to leave a record of his experiences in China.  He arrived in1275, at the end of a dynamic era called the Song dynasty.  China's economy was booming and the population was growing rapidly.  Marco Polo was flabbergasted by the size and wealth of Song dynasty cities, with populations approaching a million people or more.  This far exceeded anything he had experienced back home, where Europe was just emerging from the Dark Ages. China's fortunes have always been linked to its rivers, the Yangtze and the Yellow, which bisect the empire.  To connect these great rivers, an elaborate system of canals was constructed from north to south.  Historian Robin Yates. Although they improved the flow of goods, all these waterways were a huge impediment to foot traffic.  To solve this problem, the Song government needed to find a way to quickly build hundreds of bridges.  To permit boat traffic to flow freely, a single span was required.  Arches had always been constructed from stone, which is durable, but  expensive and time consuming. Most buildings in China were made of timber, so wood was clearly an alternative for mass producing bridges.  But wooden beams are straight, and arches are curved.  Chinese carpenters had already solved the puzzle of using timber beams to form elegantly curved roofs and Professor Tang believes Song engineers possessed similar ingenuity.  The scroll of the famous Rainbow Bridge was painted during the Song dynasty, so perhaps this was when the problem of creating arched bridges from straight timbers was also solved.  Professor Tang is both an engineer and a bridge historian.  He dismisses any thought that the bridge was just an artist's fanciful idea. After years of trying to figure out how it was designed and constructed, finally, with NOVA's help, Professor Tang will have the opportunity to bring the Rainbow Bridge back to life in the town of Jinze, just outside of Shanghai.  Jinze already has a Song dynasty bridge - it's made of stone.  Professor Tang thinks perhaps a Rainbow Bridge once stood in its place. But like the hundreds of wooden bridges built by the Song engineers, it was eventually replaced by arches of stone.  Halfway around the globe, Professor Tang's Rainbow Bridge is beginning to intrigue another bridge builder.  Bashar Altabba is a structural engineer working on Boston's Big Dig.  NOVA has asked Bashar to help build the Rainbow Bridge in China. In his course on bridge structures at MIT, he now includes analysis of the Rainbow Bridge. Is it a beam structure or is it an arch?  The problem of how to categorize the Rainbow Bridge is very confusing. This is not just an academic question.  The foundations needed to support an arched bridge are quite different from those of a beam bridge.  The job of a bridge is to transmit the weight of its load, be it pedestrians or vehicles, to the foundations on either bank.  Beams bend under tension, and arches are compressed.  While compression is a more efficient method for transmitting a load, arch bridges require very substantial foundations.  The puzzle facing Bashar is that the Rainbow Bridge is made of beams, but has the form of an arch, so what kind of foundations will it need?  With Bashar about to leave for China, a more pressing problem is coming up with a method to erect the bridge. Also traveling to China is Marcus Brandt, a timber framer from Pennsylvania.  Marcus is an expert in using traditional techniques for building large wooden structures. Marcus and Bashar are meeting today in order to finalize a construction plan that meets the requirements of the bridge site in China. The solution is to preassemble the bridge in two halves on the riverbank. Leonardo da Vinci once said that an arch consists of two weaknesses which, leaning on each other, become a strength. The town of Jinze is enjoying a major Buddhist festival hosted by the local monastery.  The first member of the bridge building team to arrive here is Robin Yates. The festival also celebrates the restoration of the oldest bridge in the town. Marcus and Bashar arrive in Jinze with the town in a party mood.  But Bashar is anxious to get started, and he quickly puts together a model to demonstrate the plan for deploying the bridge from the banks. Chen Fu Xiang is in charge of the construction crew, and neither he nor Professor Tang believes there's enough room on the banks to prefabricate the bridge in two halves.  This is disappointing news to Marcus and Bashar, who want their role to be more than back seat driving. Robin is also disappointed with the site of the Rainbow Bridge, because he thinks it has not been aligned in accordance with the ancient Chinese principles of fengshui.  To check if his suspicions are correct, Robin employs another Song dynasty invention. In addition to having bad fengshui, Bashar is worried that the bridge may also have bad foundations because the workers are not building them according to plan. Work on the foundation begins when wooden pilings are driven into the subsoil.  Granite blocks are then placed on the pilings.  The abutments require several layers of stone, each tied into the layer above by vertical blocks to make one interlocking mass of masonry.  But in order to speed up work, the stone masons simply laid the top layer on the one below, omitting a critical step
 cutting a row of L-shaped blocks to lock together the top two layers. Without L-shaped stones locking the top layer to the masonry below, Bashar worries that the bridge could do the splits. Bashar is so agitated because computer modeling of the Rainbow Bridge performed just before he left Boston convinced him that the structure has all the characteristics of an arch. If this is correct, strong abutments are needed to counteract the outward push of the arch when it's loaded. While Bashar frets over the problem of fixing the abutments, Professor Tang has come up with a new idea for erecting the bridge.  He'll assemble it piece by piece over the river.  Two boats will act as platforms for workers connecting the beams over water. Scaffolding and an ancient lifting device known as an A-frame, or sheer legs, are put in position. Marcus, an expert rigger, is extremely concerned about the security of the stakes and rope that will anchor the A-frames. Once in position, the A-frame will support the beams cantilevering out from either bank.  The first arch of the Rainbow Bridge consists of three sets of beams. The horizontal beams in the middle lock the arch in place. Interwoven with the blue three-sided arch is the red four-sided arch. Combined, the two arches should make a very strong bridge.  At least that's Professor Tang's theory.  As part of his plan to build the bridge one beam at a time, Professor Tang has come up with an ingenious idea.  Like a tailor pinning his cloth before he sews the seam, Professor Tang will use iron nails for holding the beams in place. Everyone agrees that for safety, the iron clinch nails are essential to stabilize the emerging structure. But with the first beams in place, Professor Tang points out a detail in the scroll which appears to show that the timbers were also lashed together. A thousand years ago, the lashing materials could have been hemp rope, or something that's very widely used in China
 bamboo. The problem with the strips of bamboo on hand is that they are too short for making a good lashing. In order to learn more about how to make bamboo rope, Marcus and Robin travel to the Yellow Mountains, 200 miles away.  Bamboo is actually a grass, and no other living plant grows as fast.  It can reach its full height in just 60 to 90 days.  And the Chinese use bamboo for everything, from musical instruments to scaffolding to food. In a neighboring village, these strips are turned into samples of thick bamboo rope.  Joining Marcus and Bashar is Andrew Li, an expert in Song dynasty building techniques from The Chinese University of Hong Kong. The cable consists of two parts.  The core is made of strips from the tougher outer part of the bamboo plant, while the more pliable strips from the inner layers are woven into a sheath which surrounds the core.  As Professor Tang remembers, before being replaced by steel 25 years ago, all the cables in the An Lan suspension bridge were made from bamboo. More primitive suspension bridges also employed bamboo rope.  From the braided main cables hung a thinner variety of rope for carrying the walkway.  And it is this small diameter rope that interests Marcus and Bashar, because it looks suitable for lashing together the beams of the Rainbow Bridge. It is made by spinning fine strips of bamboo and then plying together two strands of it.  To test out the strength of this bamboo rope, Marcus and Bashar will build a primitive suspension bridge.  Its design is based on a bridge Professor Tang saw in the Himalayas as a young man.  Because the bridge must span a 60-foot wide river, Bashar wants the thin ropes for the walkway to be attached to the main suspension cables on dry land. Although prefabricating the bridge seemed like a good idea, somewhere in the process of manhandling the two main cables, the multitude of smaller connecting ropes have gotten hopelessly entangled. In the confusion, Professor Tang keels over.  But fortunately nothing is damaged, except Bashar's pride. As tempers fray, Bashar suspects that some of his instructions are getting lost in translation. So he insists that Andrew be replaced by a local translator. Three hours later the faulty rolling and wrapping problem is finally untangled.  But before work can proceed, Marcus calls for time out. With the suspension cables anchored at both ends, Marcus uses a device called a Spanish windlass to start raising them. Wooden piers hold the main suspension cables high above the river, enabling Marcus to get a sense of how strong bamboo rope can be. The suspension bridge managed to support 12 people, convincing Marcus that bamboo rope was strong enough for lashing together the heavy beams of the Rainbow Bridge. But then an unexpected problem arises. A leak in one of the boats that supports the scaffolding threatens to bring production to a halt.  They bale furiously, and despite having to manhandle 200 pound beams on top of a listing platform, the builders push forward with erecting the arch. The firecrackers appear to be doing their job, because Professor Tang and the bridge builders successfully conclude the first phase of construction - erecting the skeleton of the three-sided arch. To celebrate, the team does something the Song builders might have done a millennium ago. What was fueling the growth of lively restaurant-filled cities during the Song dynasty?  Robin believes it had a lot to do with rice. The thriving economy enabled the Song government to embark on ambitious improvements to the transportation system.  Bashar visits one of the best surviving examples
 the almost mile and a half long An Ping bridge.  It was built from massive granite beams to permit travel across a tidal estuary in Fujian province. As in the piers of the bridge, granite works best in compression, so Song engineers were really pushing the envelope when they used it in tension for the beams.  To demonstrate the risk of using stone beams in bridges, Bashar compares how wood and stone behave when put under tension.  While wooden beams bend when overloaded, stone gives no warning when it's about to fail. It also limited river traffic.  In order to create longer spans and allow larger boats to pass through, Chinese engineers had to master the art of a more sophisticated structure
 the arch.  The trouble with semicircular arch bridges is the hump, which makes it awkward for all but pedestrians to cross. In 600 AD, Chinese engineers solved this problem by flattening out the hump and coming up with a radical new concept for an arch.  When constructed, the Anji bridge had the longest span of any arch in the world. And it would take another eight centuries before such a daring design was attempted in the west. To demonstrate the need for strong abutments at either end of the arch, Bashar and Marcus have set up an experiment. A car jack is placed between the arch and the abutment. As the jack is released, the powerful outward thrust produced by the two sides of the arch is clearly demonstrated. Despite the strong forces to self-destruct generated by this type of arch, the Anji is China's oldest standing bridge.  Back on the construction site, the Rainbow Bridge is beginning to take shape.  In order to continue its metamorphosis from beam to arch, the poles of the four-sided arch must be interlaced with those of the three-sided arch. Tom Peters is head of the department of architecture at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, and an old friend of Professor Tang.  He's never seen this kind of construction before. Professor Tang's technique to get the beams kissing is to force them together with a steel bolt.  A modern shortcut, it upsets Bashar, because he feels that bending the beam in that way could weaken the wood. Marcus, with his hands-on knowledge of timber framing, has always argued that some of the beams in the arch still behave like beams
 that is, they bend. As always, Professor Tang has a surprise up his sleeve.  He takes Robin deep in the mountains southwest of Shanghai to see a bridge.  From a distance, it bears no resemblance to the Rainbow Arch in the scroll.  But from underneath, it has an uncanny similarity to the structure that is taking shape in Jinze. Professor Tang tells Robin that although many details of the design are different, he's convinced that this isolated bridge is a later, improved version of the Rainbow Arch portrayed in the Song dynasty painting.  In fact, up until the 20th century, Chinese architecture changed very little. This is because the Song government produced a building code that standardized the design of all official buildings - a subject of special interest to Andrew Li. A system that also solved the problem of creating curved structures from straight beams.  While a triangular truss dictates the straight pitch of roofs in the west, Chinese roofs are curved because of the arrangement of columns and beams which support it.  Chinese carpenters could produce a roof of any size or curvature simply by adjusting the lengths and widths of these posts and crossbeams. Back in Jinze, the rainbow curve is beginning to emerge from interweaving the beams of the three- and four-sided arches. Next the decking will be nailed to the curved timbers that reduce the steep incline at either end of the arch.  The approach ramps create what is called a reverse curve, an architectural form that is particularly pleasing to Professor Tang. Before the bridge is open to the public, Professor Tang organizes a demonstration to show his confidence in the strength of the design. Four tons of water buffalo have no perceptible effect, and the bridge is declared ready for the masses. Knights in shining armor charging each other in great pitched battles - that is the popular view of warfare in the Middle Ages.  In reality, most medieval conflict involved the attacking of castles, and mounted knights were not much use against stone walls.  A siege against a castle could take weeks, even months - the attacking army pitted against a well-defended garrison within.  By the end of the 13th century, the science of defensive architecture had reached a peak.  Stone walls were built thicker and taller than ever before.  And archers could easily pick off advancing attackers.  To further frustrate attempts at breaching the walls, castles were situated on rocky crags, or surrounded by water.  But every advance in castle defense drove attackers to devise better siege weapons. 200 years before cannon appeared in Europe, chroniclers make reference to what appears to be the ultimate 13th century siege weapon - an ingenious new form of heavy artillery that flung huge stone balls with such destructive power that castle walls were reduced to rubble.  But no ancient weapon of this type has survived.  Were such claims gross exaggerations, or did such a weapon really exist?  To answer these questions, NOVA brings together a team of experts in medieval warfare who believe they know the secret. Their task - to build siege machines capable of destroying a castle wall at a range of about 200 yards. With just two weeks to meet the challenge, a siege mentality quickly sets in.  No modern builders have ever managed to do this before. In the year 1304, Edward Longshanks, more formally known as King Edward I of England, mounted the greatest siege of his reign against the Scots and their castle at Stirling.  The attack dragged on.  Impatient for victory, Edward ordered 50 carpenters to immediately begin building a monstrous new weapon - so powerful it would breach the strong walls of Stirling Castle. Details about the weapon design are tantalizingly vague, except that it was nicknamed Warwolf, and its appearance outside the walls terrified the garrison. Was it the atomic bomb of the Middle Ages?  With one blow, Warwolf leveled a section of wall, successfully concluding the siege of Stirling Castle.  What kind of a weapon was Warwolf?  Hew Kennedy is a Shropshire landowner and medieval armor expert.  10 years ago, he became intrigued by a picture of a machine drawn by Leonardo da Vinci.  It appeared to be a device for throwing dead horses, called a trebuchet.  Inspired by the power of a machine that could hurl such heavy missiles, Hew decided to try building one himself—a quest which eventually led to this piano-flinging contraption, a mechanized catapult made from a laminated beam, scrap metal, telephone poles and steel cable.  In essence, a trebuchet is a giant seesaw with a very heavy weight at one end and a much lighter missile attached to the other.  As the heavier weight drops, the lighter projectile is whipped by its sling towards the enemy.  Hew is convinced that Warwolf, Edward's great wall busting siege engine, must have been a trebuchet. To test out Hew's confidence in the destructive capability of a medieval trebuchet, NOVA is preparing some hard sandstone balls weighing 250 pounds - and a wall.  It's made of sandstone and lime mortar.  In construction and design, it is based on the upper section of a typical castle wall of the 13th century.  Hew wants to build a trebuchet capable of knocking it down, but at a range of 200 yards, it will require precision as well as brute force.  Michael Prestwich, a medieval historian, will ensure that Hew's next trebuchet will be based on an authentic 13th century design. Some of the best military engineers were employed by Edward I - a master of military tactics.  He was one of the most vicious and single-minded rulers of his time.  Soon after ascending the throne in 1274, Edward decided to squash Welsh independence and bring Wales under his personal rule. Edward's strategy was to ring the mountain stronghold of the Welsh prince with a chain of powerful castles.  Richard Holmes is an historian of military tactics. Edward and other English lords designed their Welsh strongholds with the trebuchet in mind.  For example, Caerphilly Castle was surrounded by manmade lakes which kept a besieging army and their siege weapons at a distance. At the end of the 13th century, what was the effective range of an archer?  And what was the effective range of a trebuchet?  The historical reports differ. At 200 yards, is Hew's trebuchet out of range of archers defending the castle?  To find out, a dummy representing the trebuchet's chief operator is placed at that distance. Edward's castle-building campaign in Wales had taught him how to design well defended fortresses.  Turning his attention to conquering Scotland, did Edward also have the ability to successfully attack them?  As the king marched northwards to take the castles that guarded Scotland, he brought with him some of the biggest siege engines, or trebuchets, ever built. Joining Hew Kennedy in his quest to build a trebuchet is mechanical engineer Wayne Neel, a professor from Virginia Military Institute. Wayne will design the trebuchet.  He is basing it on a picture he found in a 13th century Spanish manuscript.  The illustration gives no idea of the true scale of the trebuchet because the artist has made the machine smaller than the soldiers standing next to it. With the manuscript as a starting point, Wayne uses a combination of engineering theory and trial and error to come up with a working model.  The prototype looks promising to Marcus Brandt, a carpenter who will help Wayne build the trebuchet. To resolve the problem, Wayne re-examines the medieval illustrations of this type of trebuchet.  He's struck by the fact that many have wheels, so he decides to build a new model.  Not only do wheels eliminate the tendency for it to tip over, the movement also boosts the trebuchet's performance. Hew doubts that wheels will make a trebuchet throw farther, so he insists on a demonstration.  For the first throw, Hew holds down the model. The projectile travels 20 feet. When the trebuchet is allowed to roll, the missile goes an extra 10 feet.  Why?  The falling counterweight drives the trebuchet forward.  Like a pitcher stepping forward, this adds momentum to the throw.  The forward motion also permits the counterweight to drop further in a straighter line.  The closer the counterweight follows this optimal path, the more energy it captures for throwing. Now that Wayne has confidence in his model, the project moves to Loch Ness in the Scottish Highlands for a full-scale test.  The trials will take place in the shadow of Castle Urquhart, which may have been besieged with similar weapons during Edward I's Scottish campaigns 700 years ago.  Wayne and Hew arrive at Castle Urquhart to inspect the timber that is delivered by barge. As in the Middle Ages, heavy duty English oak is the choice for building the carriage and trestles.  But the throwing arm will be made from a more lightweight wood, Douglas fir.  Wayne calculates that a tree trunk of at least two feet in diameter is needed to withstand the stresses of hurling 250 pound balls. After it is floated across Loch Ness, the log is quickly hauled ashore. Work immediately begins on hewing it into an eight-sided throwing arm. The next job is to assemble the base.  40 carpenters, mainly from the United States, but also from Britain and Germany, have volunteered to spend their vacation here.  They're all timber framers who specialize in traditional construction techniques.  Without nails, they connect large pieces of wood using mortise and tenon joints.  While the timber framers immerse themselves in medieval methods, Wayne employs the tools of a modern engineer to check and recheck his design.  In particular, he's hoping that the wheels will give him the same boost in performance as they did on the model.  Up at the target wall, work is almost complete.  The wooden structures on top are called hoardings. They provided additional protection for defenders during the siege.   Attackers would build similar barriers to protect the trebuchet team from arrow fire. The target wall is modeled on the outer walls of Harlech and Caerphilly, two of the best defended castles in Wales.  Faced with the daunting task of taking a castle like Caerphilly, what siege tactics would an attacker adopt? Meanwhile, rotten weather has besieged Castle Urquhart.  And after a week of daily downpours, the trestles that support the throwing arm are ready to be raised.  At the top of the trestle, the throwing arm rotates on an axle that has to be both strong and exact.  Marcus Brandt has taken on the job. Marcus restores old buildings in Pennsylvania, and has enthusiastically embraced the idea of using medieval technology. Villages were often established next to the castle of a nobleman or the king. In order to position the heavy throwing arm, the timberframers place an A-frame above the trestles to support the pulley system - a standard medieval device.  A block and tackle dramatically reduces the number of people required to pull on the ropes. The next phase of construction is the most dangerous.  Without the help of a modern crane, the timber framers must trust the strength of two slender poles and the rigging of their ropes in order to raise the one ton throwing arm. With the throwing arm in position, Wayne needs to attach weights that will power the machine.  He chooses lead because he believes lead was used for the counterweight of Warwolf, the mysterious and terrifying siege engine that clinched the assault on Stirling Castle.  There is good historical evidence for this.  In a letter Edward wrote just before the siege, he demanded that lead be removed from all the churches. Wayne's calculations tell him that in order for his machine to throw a 250 pound ball, he'll need about six and a half tons of lead counterweight. It takes a week to melt down the scrap and form it into a collar that can be bolted onto the arm. A survey of medieval illustrations suggests that swinging counterweights were the more popular design.  A man who has been working with them longer than     anyone else is traditional French carpenter Renaud Beffeyte.  Renaud is convinced that Edward's great siege engine, Warwolf, had a swinging counterweight box.  The simple design of the box makes it not only cheaper, but easier to build than one with a lead counterweight.  And Renaud has found graphic accounts of the destructive power of some really big siege machines. 500 years before Newton's apple, medieval engineers had figured that trebuchets with a swinging counterweight are the most efficient at using the force of gravity.  Like adding wheels to a fixed-counterweight trebuchet, the hinge allows the swinging counterweight to descend further in a straighter line, capturing more energy for the throw.  15 years ago, Renaud came across the notebook of the 13th century French architect, Villard de Honnecourt.  In it he found the plan for the base of a trebuchet and a description of the swinging counterweight box.  Unfortunately, the page showing the rest of the trebuchet was missing.  But with his knowledge of medieval carpentry and his experience of building over 30 small trebuchets, Renaud realized that if the design were ever built, it would be monstrous - the height of a five-story building.  Ever since this discovery, Renaud has wanted to construct the full-size trebuchet.  Finally, he will get the chance at Castle Urquhart in Scotland. Renaud is left with no alternative but to hope that a couple of planks will be strong enough to splint the weakened throwing arm.  Finally, work starts on raising the great trestles.  With each passing day, the situation at Castle Urquhart more and more resembles a siege of old.  With two trebuchets to finish, there is a nagging feeling that Renaud's machine may not get done before the timberframers must return home.  Over at Wayne's trebuchet, work on attaching the lead weights is finally finished.  All that remains is to cock the arm.  Even with the help of pulleys, this requires 40 people.  With a 13,000 pound counterweight, it's a much bigger job than any one imagined.  And it will have to be repeated for each fling.  The trigger mechanism is not strong enough, and buckles alarmingly as it takes the full weight of the throwing arm. To avoid an accidental firing, they reinforce it with a length of chain. The next morning a 250 pound sandstone ball is quickly positioned in the sling for the first throw. Even with 12 timber framers pulling, the firing pin won't budge. Despite Hew's predictions that a trebuchet on wheels would shake itself to pieces, the reverse is true.  Wheels dampen the recoil.  Everything appears to be working as Wayne predicted, except the range.  The ball only traveled about 170 yards, falling short of the wall. Just like his medieval counterpart, Wayne uses a process of trial and error to alter the trebuchet's range by adjusting the length of the sling. With the first throw, a long sling resulted in a late release and a low trajectory.  By shortening the sling, Wayne believes the ball will be released earlier, resulting in a higher path.  Wayne's adjustments have the desired effect.  The second throw has perfect range, just missing the target to the right by two feet. What will be the last day for Wayne and his team dawns, with the wall still intact, but clearly under threat.  Meanwhile Renaud's trebuchet is still not finished. Still, with time so short, it's unclear that Renaud will get a chance to fire his trebuchet at all.  After last night's narrow miss, Wayne's trebuchet is repositioned to be more in line with the target. With the same 250 pound ball as yesterday, and the sling at the same length, Wayne believes he is now dead on to hit the wall with his third attempt. The third shot is identical to the second in distance.  At a range of 200 yards, adjusting the wheels one inch to the left placed the missile bang on top of the hoarding. With the trebuchet lined up on the target, Wayne only has to shorten the range by a hair to hit the stone battlements below. Worried that this may be the last attempt, Wayne makes a sudden change of plan.  He replaces the 250 pound ball that he's been using with a jumbo 300 pounder. Wayne figures that the heavier ball, clocked at a speed of 127 miles an hour, should breach the wall.  But he's wrong. Putting on their kilts for good luck, Wayne's team rushes to get in one final shot. Intoxicated with success, the timberframers bid adieu to the Highlands.  But the next morning, Renaud is heartened to find that he's not been completely abandoned.  Ed Levin and a handful of the Americans have decided to stay on in Scotland to help finish the job.  The biggest concern is whether the throwing arm has been fatally weakened at the point where the main axle passes through it.  To avoid stressing the arm, Renaud decides to only partially load his counterweight, using four tons of sand in the 12 ton capacity box.  But there are risks to this approach. The heavy ball and relatively light counterweight result in the missile landing dangerously close to the trebuchet. Two more tons of sand are added. Renaud's optimism is justified.  The missile falls just a few yards short of the wall and a bit to the right.  The team decides to give it one more day.   But the next morning starts with snow, followed by a heavy downpour. Last night's final shot was short of the wall because it was thrown too high.  Renaud believes the sling is slipping off its prong too soon.  So to delay release and lower the trajectory, the prong is bent forward. For days, Renaud has suspected that his trebuchet is pointing just to the right of the wall.  But the loaded machine is too heavy to shift, and he faces thepossibility that he may have to go home having achieved only a near miss.  At the last minute, Marcus offers a solution. By shifting the channel that holds the ball slightly to the left, they hope to redirect the missile.  It works - almost.  Another three feet and Renaud would've had a direct hit.  Unless shifting the channel was just a fluke, one more nudge to the left should bring the trebuchet right on target. After two throws which are slightly high of the wall itself, Renaud orders a minute adjustment of the prong in order to lower the trajectory.  With frayed ropes and a storm threatening to close down the siege, everything now hangs on Renaud's ability to quickly get on target - and he does.  A bull's eye on the battlements. In a real siege it would only be a matter of time before the wall is reduced to smithereens. It is clear from the experiment that both types of trebuchets work. Because it could so easily be increased in weight, the swinging box design was the improvement that tipped the balance in favor of attack.  So the great wall-busting siege engine Edward employed at Stirling Castle was almost certainly a trebuchet with a giant swinging counterweight.  The weapon that dominated siege warfare for 200 years.  It was not until the late 15th century, the end of the Middle Ages, that the superiority of cannon clearly emerged, and the trebuchet vanished into the mists of time. Egypt is littered with fantastic ruins, all created to preserve Pharaoh's name and glorify the ancient gods.  For nearly 2,000 years, ancient builders were pushed to their limits to create the most dramatic, the most impressive temples and palaces ever known.  Perhaps the most difficult challenge of all was to raise an obelisk.  Carved from a single piece of granite, an obelisk could rise over 100 feet, and weigh up to 500 tons.  How did they do it?  In 1994, a team of experts traveled to Egypt to tackle the problem.  But their attempt to erect an obelisk - just a fraction of the size of the ancient ones - fell short.  Tonight, NOVA returns to the land of the pharaohs.  Modern engineers take another look at the evidence, and try out a radical new solution to an age-old mystery.  Ropes and nerves will be strained as another team struggles to recreate the amazing deeds of an ancient empire. 4,500 years ago, when Egypt's Old Kingdom was in its first bloom, Pharaoh was God.  All the country's riches were piled into his tomb - a man-made mountain for an immortal king.  But 1,000 years later, times had changed.  A new god ruled the land
 His name was Amun.  New Kingdom pharaohs like Ramses, Thutmose and Tutankhamun still proclaimed their own divinity, yet they were all beholden to the king of gods.  So they built magnificent temples to him, filled with colossal statues and giant needles of stone - the obelisks.  Hieroglyphs proclaimed the pharaoh's loyalty.  At the pinnacle was a small pyramid - sheathed in silver and gold.  Dedicated to Amun-Ra, the sun god, the obelisks were sparkling shafts of sunlight, rendered in stone.  For the pharaoh's subjects, the effect was awesome. For over 25 years, archeologist Mark Lehner has been probing the meaning of Egypt's monuments.  He believes that colossal statues and obelisks helped pharaoh maintain his power over the Egyptian people. 3,500 years ago, along the banks of the Nile, monumental construction was routine.  But now it seems incredible.  How did Egypt manage to build so much on such a colossal scale?  How could pharaoh's builders transport and erect stones weighing hundreds of tons - in an age without cranes or steel cables?  A team of experts will try to solve the mystery.  They have three weeks to look at the evidence and recreate the Egyptians' remarkable achievements.  The first major challenge our team will face is how the ancient builders moved giant multi-ton blocks of granite.  One of the most important clues was found in the tomb of an official who lived almost 4,000 years ago. To bring the ancient scene to life, stonemason Roger Hopkins joins Mark Lehner and a large Egyptian crew in an attempt to drag a 25 ton block, set on a wooden sled.  Directing the effort will be Rais Abdel Aleem.  The Egyptian foreman has built a roadbed with wooden timbers set into the earth.  To reduce friction, the wood is smeared with animal fat.  Abdel Aleem has a lot of experience moving heavy weights.  But he usually relies on cranes and flatbed trucks - not dozens of men.  The stone should move easily with less than 100 pullers.  At least, that's what Roger hopes. To break the static friction, Abdel Aleem orders the teams of men to bounce the stone with large levers.  But with more than 100 pullers, the only thing moving seems to be the rope - which stretches more than anyone expected. Part of the problem is that the men on the ropes are not pulling together. Roger decides that the men need a little extra motivation.  Finally, with Roger shouting, "God is great!" in Arabic, the stone lurches forward. According to ancient accounts, the pharaohs had no problem gathering workforces that numbered in the thousands.  Some were slaves, others, prisoners of war. But many were Egyptian soldiers, fulfilling their duty to their king and their god.  Our crew remained enthusiastic, even though after several hours of hard work, they moved the stone only about 20 feet. Thanks to the Nile, the Egyptians were early pioneers of boat construction and design.  But was their nautical expertise so great that they could produce vessels strong enough to carry obelisks weighing hundreds of tons?  One pharaoh left compelling evidence that they could.  Her name was Hatshepsut, and she seized the throne from her young stepson around 1470 BC. One of the few women ever to rule Egypt, Hatshepsut displayed a pharaonic beard, and celebrated her reign by raising four gigantic obelisks at the Great House of Amun in Thebes.  Across the Nile, at her mortuary temple, Hatshepsut bragged of transporting two of these monoliths down the river from Aswan.  To help interpret the evidence, Mark welcomes on board nautical expert Owain Roberts.  A lifelong sailor and boat-builder, Owain specializes in reconstructing ancient vessels. On the wall of Hatshepsut's temple is a carved relief. Although much of the wall is damaged after 3,500 years, Mark and Owain can just make out an image
 two obelisks lying on the deck of a boat. But how was such a vessel constructed?  The Egyptians left behind some intriguing clues.  Tomb and temple walls are covered with images of boats. Noblemen and kings were buried with miniature replicas of the fleets they captained in life.  But perhaps the most amazing evidence was found here, at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Khufu.  Zahi Hawass, Director of Giza, now oversees all excavations on the famous pyramid plateau. In 1954, one of Zahi's predecessors, Kamal el Malach, was in charge of the site. The smell came from hundreds of planks of cedar wood, lying at the bottom of a limestone pit.  The pieces fit together like a giant jigsaw puzzle. When the puzzle was complete, it looked like this.  This is one of the oldest boats in the world. Built for the Pharaoh Khufu 4,500 years ago, it was carefully dismantled and buried next to his pyramid tomb, so he could use it in the afterlife.  For a boat lover like Owain Roberts, it's an inspiration. Today, builders rely on nails.  And modern boats are almost always constructed around a skeletal framework.  But ancient boats like Khufu's were built skin first - by weaving together thick outer planks. This is a replica of an ancient plank from Khufu's boat. The holes along the edge were made for mortise and tenon joints. Additional holes allowed the Egyptians to weave the planks together. As an extra precaution, reeds were stuffed into the seams. Finally, crossbeams were added, to provide internal support. With just wood and rope, the Egyptians created sea-going ships and barges big and strong enough to carry obelisks.  But how was such a tremendous weight loaded onto a boat without tipping it over?  Owain Roberts has come up with a boat design that would make the job easier. To prevent capsizing, a barge capable of carrying Hatshepsut's obelisks had to be extremely wide - with a length to width ratio of perhaps two to one. Owain will try out his idea on a scale model.  He beaches the front end, securing it to a ramp that leads smoothly up to the deck.  Ropes run from the obelisk up the ramp, across the deck and through two wooden blocks, which turn the ropes back toward the bank.  In this way, the pullers can stay high and dry on the beach and don't have to wade out into the river. After her obelisks were loaded, Hatshepsut's barge was towed downstream to Thebes and the great House of Amun, now known as Karnak Temple. Sprawling across hundreds of acres, the vast complex was expanded by a succession of pharaohs, over the course of several centuries.  The god himself was believed to reside in a statue - kept under lock and key in the dark heart of the temple - the holy of holies.  The statue is now gone, but ancient inscriptions describe the ritual that Amun's priests enacted within these walls. Sometimes, the priest would take the statue of Amun across the Nile to the west bank of Thebes, to visit the tombs of kings and nobles. As time went on, the quest to please and impress Amun drove pharaohs to erect bigger and bigger obelisks.  Weighing up to 500 tons, these were some of the largest single stones ever quarried anywhere in the world.  They were carved by hand and adorned with intricate hieroglyphs.  Somehow, the Egyptians managed to stand them on end - without breaking them.  Each balanced upon a small stone pedestal, with no support other than its own enormous weight.  Only a handful of ancient obelisks survive intact in their original positions.  All physical evidence of how they were raised has disappeared, except for one tantalizing clue. On every pedestal stone, a deep groove is carved in one side. Without this groove, the obelisk might slip across its base.  But the groove acts as a brake, and it helps keep the obelisk aligned when it's pulled to vertical.  The trick is getting one edge of a stone weighing hundreds of tons safely into the turning groove. Mark Whitby is one of Britain's leading engineers. He's devised a unique theory of how the ancient Egyptians might have raised their obelisks.  Inspired by the complex wood and rope-work on Egyptian ships, Mark has designed an elaborate system to rotate the obelisk slowly down onto its pedestal stone. He hopes to try out his idea in a quarry in Aswan.  A 30 ton granite obelisk has been placed atop an earthen ramp, and preparations are underway to lower it 12 feet into a turning groove.  The first task is to assemble a large wooden framework that will provide the mechanical advantage to rotate the obelisk safely.  In this supporting role is Rick Brown, a sculptor and timber framer from Massachusetts.  At the moment, he has no idea that events will soon propel him to center stage in the obelisk drama.  Meanwhile, Owain Roberts and his son Iolo are in charge of rigging nearly a mile's worth of rope.  With all this rope and wood, Mark Whitby hopes to harness the giant stone, and carefully control its descent.  While the engineer and his small army of assistants scramble to build their complicated contraption, Roger Hopkins is pursuing a completely different approach.  With the large-scale obelisk already spoken for, Roger is left to experiment with a mini two ton block.  And he's not happy about it. Even though his obelisk is small, Roger still has to lower it with care.  But instead of relying on ropes, he prefers a method that is more low-tech. Buried under 21 tons of sand is Roger's miniature pedestal stone, complete with turning groove. Roger's homespun technique doesn't impress Mark Whitby. In spite of Mark's criticisms, Roger is not alone in his support for the sandpit method. The 3,000 year old document reads, "Empty the space that has been filled with sand beneath the monument of thy lord... so that the monument may be established in its place."  Many scholars believe the Egyptians used sand. But others argue that it's difficult to control.  Removing it from around the base of a 300 or 400 ton obelisk could be dangerous. After a couple of hours, the obelisk is reaching the bottom of the sandpit.  And Roger is now removing the sand with his bare hands. Millimeter by millimeter, the obelisk sinks lower. Roger's obelisk came to rest at an angle of about 60 degrees. Weighing only two tons, it's not difficult to pull the stone to vertical.  But the ancient obelisks were up to 500 tons, and pulling them upright was not so simple.  To make the job easier, Mark Whitby thinks the Egyptians would have lowered their obelisks to a much steeper angle - like 80 degrees. To make the obelisk go forward, gangs of men will pull on ropes suspended from the wooden frame.  Mark hopes that as these ropes tighten, the obelisk will tilt downwards, and eventually rotate around the large pivot log. 60 men are brought in to pull on the ropes attached to the giant wooden frame.  The time has come to test Mark Whitby's method, and see how well he can control the obelisk.  Everyone is warned to stand back, just in case the 30 ton obelisk tilts too far, and topples off the platform.  With each tug, the giant stone teeters precariously. Rick Brown places wooden chocks beneath the rising obelisk. Mark's first goal is to tilt the obelisk down so that the pivot log makes secure contact with the top of the platform.  This log is then supposed to rotate right up to the edge - guiding the obelisk precisely toward its pedestal, 12 feet below.  But the jerky rocking of the obelisk creates a problem that Mark did not anticipate
 the giant log has slipped out of its intended position, and is moving dangerously close to the edge. The rigging team struggles to pound the log back into place.  Fearing that the human pullers may jerk the obelisk off the ledge, Mark decides to supplement the pull with a counterweight - a three-and-a-half-ton block of stone.  When its timber supports are removed, Mark hopes the weight of the stone will apply a steady downward pressure on the ropes, doing the work of 100 men.  But as the stone is lowered to the ground, Mark finds that the ropes holding the counterweight have simply stretched.  And the obelisk hasn't moved an inch. In spite of all his plans and calculations, Mark's method is not working.  Desperate to make some progress, Mark decides to take a modern shortcut - suspending the counterweight in midair with a crane.  But this risky move just causes more problems.  Mark's quickly changing plans are taking their toll on the rigging crew. With morale plummeting, Mark Whitby must give up on the counterweight. Over 200 men are put on the ropes.  Everyone senses this is Mark's last chance to make his method work. Mark's old problem with the pivot log has returned to haunt him. Once again, the giant log has crept forward.  And this time, it has gone too far. The pivot log has slid right up to the edge of the ramp, and now the chances of the obelisk crashing down have become too great.  Defeated, Mark is forced to admit the situation is too dangerous, and decides to abandon the attempt. Another obelisk raising attempt has ended in failure.  Most of the team is completely demoralized.  Timber framer Rick Brown is the exception. But unfortunately, NOVA's time in Egypt has come to an end. Back at home, jobs and families beckon.  The search for answers will have to continue somewhere else.  6,000 miles from Aswan, at a granite quarry in Massachusetts, a new plan is being hatched that may solve the obelisk puzzle, once and for all.  Rick Brown is the one member of the team who couldn't give up. In Egypt, Rick was enthusiastic about Mark Whitby's plan, but now he decides to take another look at the sandpit.  Rick liked the simplicity of Roger's method, but one thing worried him.  Roger used sand that was slightly damp - it didn't flow well, and had to be dug out from directly under the obelisk - potentially very dangerous.  Rick decides to use dry sand - abundant in Egypt's arid climate.  With the help of his wife and fellow sculptor Laura, Rick begins planning a new kind of sandbox. The main force at work in the sandpit is gravity - the obelisk sinks under its own weight.  But how is it steered into the turning groove?  Rick will try to control the stone with several brake ropes.  In addition, the back wall of the box is a series of steps - carefully aligned with the turning groove.  After perfecting his method with scale models, Rick is about to get his turn with a 36 foot obelisk. All the details of Rick's model have been scaled up for the 25 ton stone, including three gigantic ropes that run the length of the obelisk and are secured to two large brake logs.  Assisting Rick are friends from the Timber Framers' Guild - a group dedicated to traditional building techniques.  With everything in place, the team is ready to begin. At first, the movement of the obelisk is almost imperceptible.  But slowly, the point of the stone begins to rise. The approach takes time.  After half a day of digging, the obelisk has only rotated a third of the way toward the turning groove.  As the hours pass, and the obelisk sinks deeper into the pit, Rick's method is truly put to the test - when more and more pressure falls on the brake ropes. Rick's team predicted a certain amount of stretch in the ropes.  But if their estimates are wrong, the obelisk could overshoot the turning groove. Tension mounts as the stone approaches the critical angle of 75 degrees.  With the obelisk nearing the back of the sandpit, Rick can't resist the temptation to jump in and dig for himself.  The obelisk is now leaning against the wall of the sandpit and is directly in line with the turning groove. Now, it's a matter of gradually releasing the brake ropes - and removing the last bits of sand.  For three more hours the work goes on. Finally, in the dark of night, and without a sound, the 25 ton obelisk nestles into its groove.  When the sun returns, and the sandbox is removed, Rick can appreciate how far he's come. Leading the pullers is Rick's colleague, engineer Grigg Mullen. Grigg's job is to scare the undisciplined volunteers into pulling slowly and gently. If they pull too hard, the fragile obelisk could topple over and crash to the ground.  To prevent this kind of disaster, Rick's team is once again using brake ropes.  While the gang below pulls the obelisk toward vertical, the brake crew holds it back, letting the ropes out slowly, so the obelisk can't work up any momentum. When the great obelisks of Egypt were pointed to the sky, the engineers in charge of the raising would have done all they could to protect the pharaoh's monument.  Most likely, the process was slow and painstaking, relying on human sweat and the gentle force of sand.  The method may have been simple, but the result was spectacular. Mist rises off these waters as it has for centuries.  Hot springs bubble into a lead lined pool.  Against this ancient backdrop, an unusual gathering is taking place.  Although most of these people have never met, together they will take a journey into history, when the public bath was one of the most important buildings in the Roman empire.  2,000 years ago, the bath was not just a place for the highborn.  It was a community center and a daily ritual that defined what it meant to be Roman. Underlying all the luxury were advanced technologies - copious supplies of hot and cold water piped in from miles away, rooms of intoxicating warmth made possible by sophisticated heating systems.  But when the Roman empire collapsed, the world fell into darkness - and the art and science of the baths was lost.  Until now.  After 2,000 years, NOVA will build a Roman bath and strive to uncover the secrets of the most technologically advanced building of the ancient world. The Roman bath was once a technological marvel.  Today, it's a technological mystery.  A mystery that this group of engineers, archeologists and historians are hoping to solve as they journey into the mind of the ancient builders. Fikret Yegül is an architect and expert on ancient baths. After a lifetime of study, he is designing his first Roman bath - with help from Teoman Yalçinkaya, an engineer, who will build it.  But the Romans left no blueprints, no technical specifications.  All they have to go on are the ruins that remain after 2,000 years.  Crumbling evidence of heating systems that reveal little of how they worked - remnants of pipe that suggest complex plumbing.  Even the pools where the Romans bathed have fallen into ruin. Among his colleagues here, Fikret's design is problematic.   Most of them think it won't work. Who were these Roman builders?  Emanating from the city of Rome, their empire spanned more than 3,000 miles, from Syria to Scotland, and reigned supreme for 1,000 years.  Few civilizations, before or since, have built with such intensity - spectacular feats of engineering and magnificent monuments. Building was ingrained in the Roman character. But the real genius of the Roman engineers was exploiting what they learned from other cultures. With ideas, money, and slave labor appropriated from conquered nations, the emperors of Rome built increasingly complex structures - among them, the baths. The Romans built so many of them, the baths became an experimental laboratory to test out new concepts. In modern day Turkey lies an ancient Roman city called Sardis.  It's here, in the shadow of the bath at Sardis, that NOVA will try to uncover the secrets that have been lost for centuries.  Building a Roman bath begins the same way it did 2,000 years ago - with a good piece of land.  Fikret Yegül has arrived with Teoman Yalçinkaya, an engineer with an interesting sideline. For 30 years, Teoman has also been a member of the Sardis excavation team. The Romans understood solar heating and made best use of the sun's warmth by orienting the windows of the hottest room toward the south. The next step is to mark the footprint of the building in the ground. This bath will be small - like the private baths attached to the homes of very rich Romans.  The sheep are about to lose their favorite grazing area to an experiment in history.  It will take all day just to mark and prepare the foundation.  In the meantime, Garrett Fagan has also arrived in Turkey.  An expert in Roman culture, he is here to experience a Turkish hamam, a direct descendant of the Roman bath. The exercise wasn't strenuous, it was just meant to work up a sweat. Romans did not have soap.  They just scraped off the dirt and oil. Unaware of germs, Roman doctors collected the gloios from the floor and mixed it into medicinal ointments.  After sponging down, the next step was decidedly less pleasant.  Body hair was not fashionable in ancient Rome - so the bather could hire a depilator, a hair plucker. After a gentle soaping, Garrett's hamam will be over.  But a Roman bath lasted several hours, culminating in the caldarium, where the floor was so hot, wooden sandals were an absolute necessity.  The rest of the afternoon was spent socializing and arranging the evening's activity.  Garrett also hopes to experience a Roman bath - but he'll have to wait until it's built.  As groundbreaking begins, Teoman has a tough job ahead of him.  Limited to the tools and techniques known in ancient times, he has agreed to build the bath in seven weeks.  For the Romans, it might have taken months.  NOVA set up a time-lapse camera to capture every minute of the action.  The stones have been delivered and the foundation begins to take shape.  There will be three rooms, the bare necessity for a proper Roman bath.  The frigidarium, or cold room, will have a round cold pool in the apse.  The tepidarium, or warm room, is where the bathers will change their clothes and have a massage.  And in the caldarium, or hot room, there is a heated pool toward the back.  From cold to warm to hot, it's all a product of the heating system.  Below the hot pool, a fireplace, or furnace, will heat the floor, three walls of the caldarium, and one wall of the tepidarium.  Whether the heating system will work or not remains to be seen.  But first things first.  The walls must go up.  Two weeks of work is collapsed into 20 seconds.  Here, one of Rome's greatest engineering achievements is beginning to take shape.  The vaulted or domed roof was a technological leap forward in architecture.  Before the Romans, the Greeks also built large buildings.  The interiors  were filled with columns to support the heavy flat roof above.  But the Romans perfected a better idea.  They built the roof in sections, forming a curve.  At the top, a keystone is dropped in.  The downward thrust of the keystone pushes the sections outward, creating a pressure that holds the entire roof together.  With the curved roof, the columns are unnecessary.  The roof supports itself - freeing an enormous amount of interior space.  By the second century AD, the Romans had engineered the ultimate dome - the Pantheon, a temple to all the gods.  For 1500 years it stood as the largest open interior space in the world.  This remarkable building owes its existence to the thousands of baths built before it.  With each one, the Romans perfected the art and science of the dome. Our vaulted roof is made of brick.  The wood forms maintain the domed shape and hold the bricks in place until the roof is finished.   A thin piece of wood ensures the correct distance and angle between the bricks.  It will take several days to complete the roof.  Meanwhile, Tony Rook and his colleague Bryan Scott have arrived. At their first meeting, Tony was skeptical of Fikret's design, especially of the heating system. Tony thought it would never heat up properly, and soon enough he will find out if he was right.  Before he studied archeology, Tony was a building materials specialist. And one material in particular, now going on the vaulted roof, is considered by many to be Rome's greatest contribution to engineering.  Cheap, durable, versatile concrete.  Concrete enabled the Romans to become spectacular builders.  Without it, the Colosseum would not exist, nor would the Pantheon. The recipe for concrete was written down by the Roman architect Vitruvius in the first century BC.  The main ingredient comes from one of the most common materials in the world, limestone. Quicklime is chemically very different from limestone.  All the carbon dioxide has been burned off.  Then, when water is added, something strange starts to happen. As more water is added, the powder turns into a putty adhesive enough to bond the coarse materials that make up concrete. Added to the lime - sand and an aggregate of rock.  To make the concrete waterproof, the Romans also mixed in crushed tile.  They preferred volcanic ash, but it wasn't available in most places. Almost four weeks - more than half the time has passed and Teoman is anxious to move on.  With the exterior work mostly done, it is time to tackle the hardest part - the heating system inside.  The roof forms over the frigidarium will stay up a little while longer.  But the heating system goes in the tepidarium and caldarium - so there the scaffolding must come down. Tearing down the vault planking is a nerve-wracking process.  If the roof wasn't built right, it might not hold together.  Everyone is relieved when the roof stays up.  The heart of the heating system is the fireplace or furnace, as they call it.  Fikret is putting on the final touches. Max Fordham and his colleague Tristan Couch are heating engineers. Max has designed some of the most complex climate control systems in the world, including Britain's Tate Gallery and the Savoy Theatre. These ruins from Bath, England show that the heating system was a tour de force of Roman engineering.  They even had a name for it
 hypocaust, which means "fire underneath."  A Roman writer credited the invention of the hypocaust to an entrepreneur named Sergius Orata and his love for oysters. Orata wanted to cultivate and sell oysters, but he needed a constant supply of warm water to breed them.  So he mounted oyster pans on pillars and lit a fire underneath.  The hot air circulated beneath the oyster beds, heating the water inside.  The best temperature for breeding was achieved by adjusting the size of the fire.  It's a good story, but most historians don't buy it. There's nothing in the record about how well Orata's oyster business did, but there's a great deal of evidence that hypocausts eventually heated every Roman bath built.  The hypocaust starts in the furnace which connects to the caldarium, the hottest room.  There is an opening on the right to the tepidarium, the warm room.  Pillars, called pilae, will raise the floor about three feet.  On top of the pilae, large floor tiles, called bipedalis, will be installed.  A layer of concrete goes on top and then another layer of marble. For the system to work, the hot gases are drawn from the furnace through the rooms, where they rise and spread out, heating the floor as they go.  There are four flues, or chimneys, to draw the hot gases toward them, promoting the circulation of the heat and providing a way out for the smoke.  Part of Max's role is to assess whether the gases will flow properly.  If the system isn't pulling a draft, it will never heat up the bath. This is a good sign that the system might be working properly, taking air from the outside and drawing it in.  But will the chimneys draw air as well?  Max steps inside the caldarium to check. His method is decidedly low tech, but it may well have been how the Romans tested it too. Next, Max goes to the furnace to see if the heat of the fire will be drawn into the room as it should. This might look like a good sign, but the room is wide open.  If the raised floor isn't designed and installed properly, the gas flow could be blocked and the room won't heat. The men start building the pilae. After the mortar sets, Max tries to crawl through.  The Romans would have built the heating system large enough for a slave to fit under for cleaning or repair. The pilae in this bath are several centimeters closer together than the Romans usually built them.  Max worries it will impede the flow of hot gases. But the spacing of the pilae was limited by the size of the tiles that will go on top. Making those tiles was a frustrating and expensive lesson for Teoman. And now he has to face the criticism of Tony Rook. The clay tiles kept cracking, some even exploded inside the kiln. The Romans would have let them dry for months, even years.  But Teoman only had a few weeks.  The final solution was decidedly un-Roman. The floor tiles, each in a steel frame, are carefully placed a few inches away from the wall.  The reason will soon be apparent.  For centuries, the Romans only used under floor heating.  Then, around the first century AD, archeological evidence revealed something new.  This is Ephesus, Turkey, a nearby Roman city with several baths.  And each one reveals a surprising new addition - hollow clay boxes, called tubuli, lining the walls of the heated rooms.  The Romans had introduced radiant wall heating, which made the system much more complex.  The tubuli are placed over the hole between the ledge and the floor tile.  When stacked on top of each other, a vertical channel is formed for hot gases to rise.  The round holes, placed side by side, create a horizontal path so the gases can also circulate across the wall.  But what to do when they get to the top is a mystery.  This ancient bath at Ephesus has no roof.  The grand imperial baths of Caracalla in Rome have no roof.  And neither does the bath at Sardis.  There are so few archeological remains that our team differed widely about how the hot gases might flow through the tubuli and vent out. The system they settled on works like this.  Along the open edges of the floor, the hot gases rise up the vertical channels and flow horizontally through the holes.  When they get to the top, they meet up with a horizontal channel connected to the chimney flue.  The draft from the chimney draws the hot gases and keeps the circulation going so that a continuous stream of heated air cycles through.  Ibrahim Akyar is building the horizontal channel.  First, he cuts the hole in the chimney.  Then he carefully matches the openings.  The tubuli are bonded to the wall by mortar.  It's similar to concrete, but without the coarse ingredients.  Tons of mortar have been used in this small bath.  And giving it all time to dry will become a serious problem.  The Romans would have allowed weeks, even months, for the building to dry.  But Teoman has only 10 days to complete construction and three days to heat up the building.  Such a tight schedule could be a recipe for disaster. Teoman is well aware of the problem, but there's still so much to do. The hypocaust floors need a layer of concrete.  Four to five inches thick, it will take several days to dry.  Only Teoman will wait it out.  Everyone else has jobs and things to do back home.  They'll return in 10 days to light the furnace.  As plastering begins on the ceiling, their problems are about to multiply.  Rain not only slows down Teoman's schedule, it also soaks an already wet building.  Even the stray puppy that adopted the bath as her new home gets drenched.  Of all the engineering achievements of the Roman empire, one stands above all others.  Without it, there would have been no baths.  Without it, there would have been no Rome.  The Roman aqueduct, the single greatest system for the transport of water known to the world until this century.  Even today, the water of Rome's Trevi fountain comes from an ancient aqueduct. The source of Rome's water lay 50 miles outside the city, in the foothills of the Apennines, where the Anio River flows.  But the best drinking water in all of Rome came from nearby mountain springs.  This is where the Aqua Claudia aqueduct was built starting in 38 AD.  But there's nothing to see because it's all underground.  The Aqua Claudia began with a large, deep basin that collected cold spring water.  An underground aqueduct directed it toward Rome, following the contours of the land, sometimes boring deep under the mountains.  There were no pumps to move the water along.  The system worked solely on gravity - a small, gentle slope for about 50 miles. Much of the Aqua Claudia is still there, buried beneath the surface.  Peter Aicher is about to show Garrett Fagan something few people have ever seen. The front face of this mountain cliff has broken off, revealing the Aqua Claudia tunnel hidden inside. They're walking in the opposite direction the water flowed.  As they move deeper into the channel, they find along the wall, remnants of Roman waterproof concrete. They also find a buildup of hard water mineral deposits, centuries old. There was a surprising benefit to these mineral deposits. They would coat the lead pipes used throughout the city, preventing lead poisons from leaching into the water supply. The Aqua Claudia tunnels underground for more than 40 miles.  But eventually, mountains come to an end.  That's when aqueducts emerge, in a spectacular display of Roman engineering.  Graceful arcades of arches, 60 feet high, carrying water in channels along the top.  This bridge carried two aqueducts, the Aqua Claudia on the bottom and the mostly missing channel of the Anio Novis aqueduct on top.  At Porte Maggiore, one of the highest spots in the city, the Aqua Claudia, along with seven other aqueducts, finally reaches Rome. At this point, the system switched to closed, pressurized pipes which delivered the water all over town. Aqueducts were built throughout the Roman empire.  Almost 2,000 years ago, an aqueduct sloped down the Tmolos Mountains to supply the bath at Sardis. It used thousands of gallons of water every day.  But it never went to waste. After the water was drained from the baths, it was channeled through this multi-seat latrine as a flushing system.  With seats lining all the walls, this latrine accommodated two dozen people.  It offers a revealing look at Roman culture, where personal habits were surprisingly public. With the rain, the marbling inside the bath house is going very slowly.  As they put mortar on one side of the frigidarium wall, the marble on the other side buckles.  The mortar is so wet, it settled to the bottom and pushed the marble out. Sections of this wall will have to be redone.  For Teoman, this is the last straw.  Even though the sky is beginning to clear, he's worried the building won't dry or heat up properly.  He needs some advice. But without Max or Tony at hand, Teoman drives down to the village for help. There's no heating engineer here.  But there is a baker - who fires his oven every day.  He agrees to come up to the site.  In the meantime, the wood fuel that Teoman ordered has arrived, at least a week's worth of it. The whole team was looking forward to lighting the fire.  But Teoman has made a risky decision - to light it early in the hopes of drying the building.  It's a tense time.  Will the furnace draw properly?  Will the chimneys vent?  Will the rooms heat up?  And most important, will the building crack?  After a half hour, things aren't looking so good.  Most of the heat is heading the wrong direction - out of the furnace. The baker will push the fire deep under the caldarium, closer to the chimneys.  And a couple of hours later, it's a sight to behold.  Not only is smoke pouring out of the chimney, but inside it's even seeping out of the unfinished parts of the doorway between the seams of the tubuli. Four more nights and the others will arrive to see it. Fikret couldn't resist a little jab at those who had doubted his design.  Inside, they start feeling the walls to see if the tubuli are heating up evenly. But Max has brought some equipment that can see right through the walls - an infrared camera that shows heat ranges by color.  White is off the charts, red is about 250 degrees Fahrenheit, then the temperature descends from yellow, to green, to blue, and so on.  The black areas are where the tubuli stop.  It's telling everyone where the gases are flowing inside. With the construction almost done and the building heating up, it's time for the final act - heating up the bath water.  No one knows what the temperature of the water actually was, but there are hints.  Ancient stories of water so hot that heavy drinkers would have to be carried out, unconscious. The system they used to heat the water was surprisingly similar to ours today - a hot water boiler.  Modeled after a boiler found in the ruins of a Roman bath in Algeria, this one will be installed in the morning.  A simple task that will stir up some simmering tensions. As the day begins, Tony and Bryan suggest a change in the plumbing connections to the boiler. The tank is designed to have the hot water come out of one of these side connections.  But Tony and Bryan believe that if it came out the top, the boiler would be more efficient.  They might be right, but it is, perhaps, one criticism too many.  The atmosphere becomes charged. Max, the engineer, wants to test the heating system to its engineering limit.  Fikret, the historian, wants only to heat it to the limit of a Turkish bath.  It becomes a clash of professional disciplines. The argument goes on until they reach a compromise.  The bath will only be heated to 40 degrees centigrade, but the changes will be made to the boiler.  The hot water connections are quickly reconfigured.  The boiler is moved into place and attached. With the building heated, they can pull the fire back from the middle of the caldarium to where it belongs - under the boiler. It will take all day for the water to heat up.  In the meantime, a few finishing touches are left inside.  A marble mosaic for the floor, and a fresco for the wall, copied from a Roman house in Ephesus, Turkey.  At the end of the day, Tony and Bryan turn on the water.  It takes several hours to fill the pool.  Tomorrow is bath time. The team has waited seven weeks and a lifetime for this experience. But while everyone sleeps, something goes terribly wrong. Teoman believes the problem stems from heating the bath early, before the marble walls were completely dry.  The mortar at the joints didn't have the proper setting time, and it cracked. There is a quick solution - silicon sealant.  It's not Roman, but time has run out and everyone is anxious to take their bath. With some lingering doubts, everyone gathers for a final lunch, a very lengthy lunch, while the pool slowly fills.  Few people have waited so long to take a bath. As they file out of the hot bath, Garrett is reminded where the heat is coming from. Like good Romans, they head for the cold room.  The frigidarium pool has leaked as well.  It makes the act of submerging a bit undignified, but it's a required part of the full experiment. Today the little bath still stands in an olive grove in Sart, Turkey. Teoman still lives and works nearby.  It will be safe in his hands. In the Spring of 1945, Hitler's armies were all but defeated. On the 12th of April, a detachment from the U.S. 9th Infantry was sent to capture a small town in the southeast of Germany called Colditz. Perched on the top of a hill in front of them was an imposing medieval fortress, Colditz Castle. A prisoner of war camp, although the U.S. troops didn't know it. Colditz Castle was the Nazis' top security prison. Here they kept under close guard habitual escapers,allied officers who had already made several bids for freedom.	Allen's failed escape was just the beginning. Undaunted, his comrades were desperate to rejoin the struggle against Hitler. Their lives were on the line. No risk was too great if it meant freedom. Located in the former East Germany, near the border with Czechoslovakia, Colditz was supposed to be the Nazis' highest security camp.  Over that first winter, allied officers who kept trying to escape began to arrive at Colditz. Within a year, there would be 40 Poles, another 50 British, 12 Serbs, 60 Dutch, eight Belgians and over 60 French. All these officers had one thing in common-a fundamental part of their training was the duty to escape the enemy. At the center of the castle was the medieval inner courtyard in which the prisoners were confined. Its walls were up to 12 feet thick, a challenge to any tunneler. Outside this were the battlements, rising up to 75 feet of solid rock. Below these was a double fence of barbed wire. Armed sentries patrolled the wire, night and day.Below the wire, the ground fell away in a sheer drop for 150 feet to the valley floor. At night machine gun nests and searchlights covered the exterior. An escape committee was formed. To head it, they selected thirty-one-year old Pat Reed. With his engineer's eye, Reed could see beyond the skin of the building to its vents, ducts, drains, its ready-made escape routes. In the early days, prisoners tried anything—jumping fences, risking being shot. It was considered an officer's duty to escape. Soon, finding a way out of Colditz became part of everyday life.  One of MI9's most ingenious schemes involved the record company HMV. Only a few maps made it into the camp from London, but every potential escaper would need one. Kenneth Lockwood came up with a novel idea of how to duplicate them. Provoking the German guards was a favorite past time—usually a decoy for escapes. Sinclair devoted every waking hour to escape—a single-minded battle between himself and his German guards. Sinclair was the central player in the most audacious attempt to break out of Colditz. The escape industry went into overdrive. Cardboard and boot polish became a leather holster. Franz Josef's hat was meticulously copied. And ropes to carry 30 escaping prisoners from the windows to the ground were prepared. Each of the 30 escapers would need a forged pass to travel around Germany. This was called an Auschweiss.  Their papers complete, the escapers now needed to hide these precious documents. On the night of September 2nd 1943, the plan went into action. Mike Sinclair and his two guards broke out onto the terrace. Disguised as Franz Josef, Sinclair approached the next sentry who was also fooled. All that remained now was the guard at the main terrace gate. The guard became suspicious because Sinclair's pass was the wrong color. He raised the alarm. German guard Peter Hofmann rushed out. The bullet missed Sinclair's heart by an inch, but he was taken to the Colditz hospital and lived to try again. Bill Goldfinch's idea was to build a glider and launch it from the top of the castle. Neither one of them had an idea of how to build a glider. But they found a textbook in the prison library. With this information, Bill went to the drawing board and produced the first plan. The design developed to carry two people, but if they continued making the parts in their quarters, it couldn't be kept secret for long. The prisoners would need a permanent workspace. Hugo Ironside and Pat Ferguson were brought in to work on the glider. They haven't been back to Colditz since the war. And little has changed to the prisoners' courtyard. But they are eager to find the secret glider workshop high up in one of the attics. The location was chosen because it was just above the roof picked out for the launching. Back then the staircase only gained them access to the lower attic. From here they had to go up through the ceiling. Today, the climb is a lot easier.The wall which they built back then to seal them into their hideaway has been removed. The main gate was the only way into the prisoners' courtyard. Through here came special guards called ferrets to search the building for anything out of the ordinary. To keep the workshop secure, the POWs used an elaborate lookout system. The false wall was so convincing that the Germans didn't notice that the top attic was shorter by eight feet. But this glider uses modern technology. Electric saws and planes do the work in seconds that took Jack, Bill and the others weeks. The replica is following Bill's plan to the inch. Within nine days the shape of the aircraft is emerging. It took the prisoners nine months to get to this stage. It appeared that the tide was turning. But there was still no hope of immediate release. Many of the inmates at Colditz Castle were now spending their fourth year in captivity. As work on the glider continued,rumors spread through Colditz of an allied invasion. As soon as the news was delivered round the world, so it was around the prison camp. The gamblers started laying bets on when the war would end. Suddenly the cry "home by Christmas" didn't sound so hollow. They contain over 6000 hand-shaped components. Once assembled, the new glider will be virtually identical to the original. They were U.S. tanks with their guns aimed right at the castle.  The shelling from the approaching U.S. tanks was quickly directed away from the castle, and it was turned on the Germans. The order was given to attack the town. Twenty-two riflemen approached through the woods, supported by more troops with heavy machine guns. Crack SS troops supplemented by a ragged army of old men and Hitler Youth were no match for the U.S. troops. After a night of heavy shelling the SS has withdrawn, leaving Colditz undefended. The U.S. liberators found another more sinister camp in Colditz, a slave labor camp run by the SS. Hundreds of Hungarian Jewish men and women had been marched there from Auschwitz in November 1944. The U.S. troops found a mass grave for over 400 men and women who had been shot, but there were a few survivors among the bodies. But the prisoners and their U.S. liberators weren't ready to go home just yet. High up in the roof of the chapel lay the completed parts of an aircraft, waiting to be put together. This is the only known photograph of what was christened "The Colditz Cock," taken that day by an unknown GI. Jack and Bill proudly displayed the glider to their German guards and their U.S. liberators. More than 50 years later The Colditz Cock will be reborn, witnessed by the prisoners who secretly and carefully crafted the original. It was left behind in Colditz when the prisoners were evacuated back to Britain. They never saw it again. But rumor is that is was burned after the war. And finally the question of whether it would have flown can be answered. His name is Yax K'uk Mo'. His spirit haunts this valley, deep in the rainforest of Honduras. He is the legendary founder of Copan, a Maya city mysteriously abandoned over 1000 years ago. For 400 years, his dynasty of Holy Lords rules a kingdom through hallucinogenic visions, ritual warfare and human sacrifice. Sharer descends into the humid darkness, traveling back in archaeological time. In the depths of this sacred monument a modern scientist rediscovers a 1600-year-old tomb. Inside, Sharer finds the disintegrating, jade-studded skeleton. Are these the bones of Yax K'uk Mo'? November 17th, 1839, in the jungles of Honduras, a small expedition is about to make a momentous discovery. Two young explorers, American John Lloyd Stephens and Englishman Frederick Catherwood, stumble upon a vine-strangled ruin. They are entering the ancient Maya city of Copan. To resurrect the voice of the Maya, scholars must overcome one of the most tragic losses in history—that of the Maya code. Their knowledge of the number system helped early scholars discover that the Maya books were celestial almanacs. The Maya could chart the 365-day solar cycle, predict solar and lunar eclipses, and even track the complex orbit of Venus. Amazingly, their Venus almanac is accurate to within two hours every 500 years. To the Maya, Venus was not the planet of love, but the god of ritual warfare and bloody sacrifice. Are these the kings responsible for Copan's magnificent temples and bloody rituals? The Sky is Newly Revealed. Fire is the Strength of the Sky God K'Awiil.  Eighteen Are the Images of the God, nicknamed 18 Rabbit. Fire is the Mouth of the Snake.  The Jaguar Mirror. After 150 years of trying to crack the Maya code, the most prominent figure on Altar Q now has a name—K'Inich Yax K'uk Mo'—Great Sun Green Quetzal Macaw. Each of Copan's 16 kings built his own temples on top of the previous king's, a tradition which, over many generations, formed the monuments of the Acropolis.  After working their way down through the layers, archaeologists finally reached the depth that should correspond to the origins of the mighty Copan dynasty. Here, at the very foundation of the Acropolis, Bill Fash's colleague Robert Sharer hopes to uncover the truth about Copan's legendary founder Yax K'uk Mo'.  Before his eyes is a disintegrating skeleton decorated with jade and jewels. Are these the remains of Yax K'uk Mo'? This particular jade bead is carved with the woven mat motif, which, to the Maya, represented rulership. And this person's teeth are filed and inlaid with jade, also a symbol of Maya aristocracy But the skeleton holds more clues. Studies of the minerals found in the teeth and bones indicate that this individual is not from Copan. In Maya legend and hieroglyphic text, Yax K'uk Mo' is referred to as Lord of the West. But if he is not native to Copan, where is he from? Based on the evidence—the location of the tomb in the Acropolis, matching the jewelry and fractured bones from the tomb with the image of Yax K'uk Mo' on Altar Q, and the origin of the bones confirming the text on Altar Q—archaeologists are now sure Yax K'uk Mo' was a real king, and that they have discovered his tomb. The river was also a valuable trade route for cotton, exotic bird feathers, obsidian and jade. The rulers of early Copan grew prosperous and began to build. And by the year 400, the time of Yax K'uk Mo's arrival, Copan is dominated by feuding warlords.  Yax K'uk Mo's arrival is probably marked by terror and bloodshed. He may have consolidated his power through a strategic alliance, marrying into the family of a local warlord. But how did he ensure the lasting success of his dynasty, one that endures for the next 15 generations? Evidence of his strategy is hidden in the forest on the edge of Copan's Great Plaza.  Fash suspects that one of those structures lies beneath this tree-covered mound. His field-study students survey the area. As soon as workers start to excavate, they uncover cut-stone building blocks. These blocks are the remains of an earlier Acropolis, a ritual center that pre-dates the arrival of Yax K'uk Mo'. The structure that would replace it seems to have been carefully designed by Yax K'uk Mo' to solidify his rule. Yax K'uk Mo' builds bigger than any Maya lord before him. For the first time in Copan, the temples and monuments are inscribed with Maya writing. In these inscriptions the legend of Yax K'uk Mo' is born. Yax K'uk Mo', Lord of the West, the outsider, accomplishes what had never been done before—he consolidates power into a single dynasty and sparks a period of unprecedented growth and artistic achievement. This iconographic connection to Yax K'uk Mo' becomes the visual propaganda technique employed by each of the fourteen kings that follow. From the Mot Mot Marker, to the Hieroglyphic Stairway, to Altar Q, the kings of Copan legitimize their power by linking themselves to the dynastic founder, Yax K'uk Mo'. For nearly a century the Maya kings maintain Rosalila, retouching its ornate sculpture with fresh plaster and paint. The original grandeur and beauty of Rosalila is restored in this full-scale model in the Copan museum.  But how long could the legacy of Yax K'uk Mo' sustain a dynasty? By the time of 18 Rabbit, the 13th ruler of Copan, the city reaches the height of its power. Copan has vassal cities in Quirigua, Los Higos, and Rio Amarillo. 18 Rabbit extends Copan's sacred geography far beyond the Acropolis and Great Plaza, erecting monuments deep into the valley. For over 400 years, this elaborate system of ceremony and sacrifice secured power for the kings and ruling elite of Copan and other Maya cities. So what happened to this potent dynasty? Smoke Shell, the 14th king of Yax K'uk Mo's dynasty, builds the colossal Hieroglyphic Stairway to demonstrate his authority and assure his people all is well. But as soon as archeologists start excavating the Stairway in the 1890s, they find its shoddy construction contradicts the propaganda. Over the next 100 years the power of the dynasty continues to decline. In a last desperate attempt, Yax Pasah, the 16th and final King of Copan, tries to resurrect Copan's former glory by commissioning the carving of Altar Q. It is the end of the Ninth Baktun. The dynasty of Yax K'uk Mo' has endured an entire 400-year cycle. In 1949, the Soviet Union explodes its first atom bomb. But was the design stolen from American nuclear secrets? The answer would emerge only after the Cold War ended, when archives, like this one in Moscow, began to open to scholars. When historians Harvey Klehr and John Haynes examined the top-secret documents they were startled. Buried in the files were lists of names of U.S. government employees from World War Two.  All had been accused of being Soviet spies. The charges never stuck but were they true?  The decodes reveal that a massive Soviet spy network penetrated the U.S. government during World War Two. Even more incredible, the government knew about these spies as early as 1948 but kept the information secret until the end of the Cold War.  The decodes raise serious concerns about the government's prosecution of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.  And the government knew something else
 the name of a spy who did far more damage than the Rosenbergs. The spy who stole some of America's most important nuclear secrets was never prosecuted. But the truth about Soviet espionage was kept from the American public for nearly fifty years.  In 1943 America was at war. At Arlington Hall, outside Washington, D.C., Army code breakers were trying to penetrate enemy communications. One day they received a surprising order, "Start spying on America's ally the Soviet Union."  Soviet diplomats communicated with Moscow by regular commercial telegraph, and wartime censorship allowed the U.S. Army to receive copies of all international cables.  The code breakers began sifting through tens of thousands of coded telegrams. Physicist Sam Cohen was 23 when he was drafted and sent to Los Alamos. Suddenly, he was mingling with some of the world's greatest scientists and engineers.  But building a nuclear bomb took even these scientists into uncharted territory. The materials it would be made of were two highly radioactive elements, uranium and plutonium. From the common type of uranium, U-238, they needed to extract a rare isotope, U-235, but this was a difficult and expensive process. Plutonium had a different problem
 it was so radioactive it had to be set off in an entirely new way.  It was called "implosion." And it works like this, in theory
 a sphere of plutonium was encased in a metal shell called a tamper, then surrounded by a layer of explosives. When the explosives were detonated, the shock wave would travel inward, compressing the plutonium into a critical mass. At the center of the bomb, a tiny device called the initiator would spew out neutrons and initiate a runaway chain reaction in the plutonium, an atomic explosion. At 18, Hall was the youngest physicist at Los Alamos.  The research on implosion was supposed to be secret, but it was quickly smuggled out of Los Alamos and brought 6,000 miles to the edge of Moscow, where Russia's top nuclear scientist had his office. Ironically, evidence of Soviet espionage was in the hands of American code breakers at Arlington Hall almost as soon as it occurred, but no one knew it, because they hadn't yet broken the code—although they were working on it. They knew that the Soviets used a type of code called a "one-time pad system." Regrouping prepares the message for the next crucial step, the one-time pad.  Random numbers are ideal for code making. They form no pattern, so there's no way to predict what the next number will be from what the last number was. The original message has now become a string of random numbers.  It's the perfect code. Even with today's super computers it cannot be broken if it is used properly. So the code breakers tried to imagine what mistakes the Soviets might have made.  The code breakers began to hunt through thousands of messages. They were looking for pairs of messages that had matching sequences of letters in two or more places. The more of these matches they found, the more likely it was that the same sheets of one-time pad had been reused. So they began to look for messages that had these double matches. Today, digital computers could do the work in a few hours, but at the time punch cards were the fastest technology available. The operator punched in each message, converting it from letters back into numbers using the standard telegraph table.  Now the code breakers had to figure out the Russian word that each code group stood for and its English equivalent. They were trying to reconstruct a KGB code book they'd never seen. This kind of work is known as "book breaking." One of the best book breakers was Meredith Gardner, a linguist who'd mastered twelve languages. "Zero six six nine," for example, stood for the Russian word "vah," which means "into."   No one knew at the time but William Weisband was a KGB spy. Only later would it become clear just how much damage he had done. The collaboration quickly paid off. With Lamphere's information Gardner could decipher more code groups and translate larger sections of some messages.  Klaus Fuchs was arrested in England in February 1950 and sentenced to fourteen years in prison. He admitted giving the KGB a sketch of the plutonium bomb and detailed information on implosion. Fuchs identified Harry Gold as his KGB courier.  The telegrams provided clues to Liberal's identity. His wife's name was Ethel. They both were "fellow countrymen," KGB jargon for Communist Party members. Liberal's sister-in-law was Ruth Greenglass. She lived in lower Manhattan. The Rosenbergs were charged with conspiracy to commit espionage, but at their trial the prosecutor implied that they had actually stolen the secret of the atom bomb and given it to Russia. No mention was ever made in court of the Soviet telegrams. While the Rosenberg case was unfolding, Gardner broke into the most explicit KGB message he would ever read about two atomic spies. The message was sent from New York to Moscow in November 1944. Theodore Hall, 19 years old, a graduate of Harvard, a physicist, handed over a report about "CAMP-2"—the KGB cover name for Los Alamos—and named the key personnel working on "Enormous," the KGB cover name for America's nuclear program.  But the surveillance produced no further evidence of espionage. Robert McQueen, the FBI agent in charge, had only one option left.  They drove into an alley and took Hall in through the back door. McQueen had planned every step for maximum intimidation. Hall did not know that Sax had already been picked up and was in a room upstairs. McQueen put Hall in another room. The questions were based on Gardner's decodes. McQueen asked Hall if he had met Sax in New York in 1944 and handed atomic secrets to the KGB. If Hall was shocked by the question he didn't show it.  Hall denied everything, but Sax admitted that he might have met Hall in New York. After nearly three hours, McQueen had failed to get a confession from either man. But he wasn't about to give up. He told Hall to return on Monday for more questions. When Hall got home that night he and Joan sprang into action. When Hall left for the FBI office on Monday morning, Joan worried that he'd end up in jail. But McQueen did not have enough evidence to make an arrest.  According to the official FBI report Hall refused to answer more questions and the interview ended calmly. But that's not what Joan Hall remembers.  In spite of Ted's bravado the Halls were terrified, with good reason. Ted Hall was a KGB spy. Hall made the decision to become a spy while working at Los Alamos. In October 1944 Hall had gone to New York with a report on the bomb. He met up with his former Harvard roommate Saville Sax. Sax had grown up in a tight community of Russian Jewish immigrants.  Hall and Sax went looking for a Soviet agent.  Sergei Kournikov was a Soviet journalist—and a KGB agent. Hall went to visit him.  Hall began hinting at his secret work at Los Alamos.  Among the papers was a list of atomic scientists. It was the same list that Meredith Gardner would decode two years later.  After Hall returned to Los Alamos from New York he continued to send atomic secrets to the KGB via Saville Sax and other couriers.  Hall's spy methods were amateurish but effective. He used milk as invisible ink to copy down classified equations on the edges of a newspaper, which he mailed to Saville Sax in New York, who took it to the Soviet consulate.  Neither Hall nor Fuchs knew that the other was a spy, and that made them even more valuable to the KGB.  When Ted Hall married Joan Krakover in Chicago in 1947 he promised her that his spying days were over. But within a year, he was back spying for the KGB, even recruiting other scientists. After the FBI interviewed Hall in 1951 they grilled his colleagues from Los Alamos.  By early 1952 the FBI still had no evidence against Hall and Sax apart from the decoded Soviet telegrams.   So the FBI put the Hall and Sax case on hold. But protecting the secrecy of the Venona decodes was not the only reason they weren't used in court.  As the Rosenbergs were inspiring a worldwide campaign for clemency Hall came up with his own plan on how to save them. Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were executed in the electric chair at Sing Sing Prison on June 19, 1953.  Because the Soviet cables had been kept out of court, neither judge nor jury had gotten to read Gardner's decode of a KGB message which indicated that Ethel was not a spy like Julius. As Gardner reported, the word "work" was KGB jargon for "espionage" which would explain why Ethel was never given a cover name. According to Joan Hall, her husband stopped spying a few months later. By 1965, when this photo was taken, the family had moved to England, where Hall went on to a distinguished career in biophysics. Saville Sax died in 1980. In 1997, two years before Ted Hall died from cancer, he defended his actions at Los Alamos to a visiting scholar.   What should have been done with Ted Hall? Ted Hall was not the only atomic spy to go free. Cover names of at least three other atomic spies appear in the cables.  Ultimately the code breakers found cover names for more than 300 Americans who spied for the Soviets in World War Two.  But even this incomplete list is remarkable
 Harry Dexter White, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, cover name "Lawyer;" Larry Duggan, Chief of the Division of American Republics at the State Department, cover name "Prince;" Lauchlin Currie, Senior Administrative Assistant to President Roosevelt, cover name "Page."  Venona also helps to settle the case of Alger Hiss, the State Department official accused of spying.   The cables also helped to uncover three KGB agents working at high levels in the British government
 Donald Maclean, Guy Burgess, and Kim Philby. All three escaped arrest by fleeing to Moscow. Ironically, there is no evidence that Senator Joseph McCarthy, who smeared hundreds of innocent people as Soviet spies, ever heard of the Venona project.   The authenticity of the Venona decodes has been corroborated recently by Alexander Vassiliev, a former KGB agent now living in London. Vassiliev managed to smuggle out of Russia copies of top-secret reports written to Moscow by KGB agents in America.  According to Vassiliev this is the actual text of a report to the KGB by Julius Rosenberg. He and Ethel asked Ruth Greenglass to convince her husband, David, to spy at Los Alamos. The Venona project lasted until 1980. Only those messages that reused sheets of one-time pad could be read, less than one percent of the total. No messages sent after 1948 could be broken; that's because the code breakers had been betrayed by one of their own. William Weisband was the linguist who'd watched Meredith Gardner break his first KGB message.  Weisband was questioned by the FBI in 1950 and jailed for contempt of court. To protect the secrecy of Venona he was never charged with espionage. Beyond its revelations, Venona raises important questions about the value and the danger of secrecy in a democratic society. But fundamentally, and undeniably, it was a triumph of code breaking seldom equaled or surpassed.  In this tiny village in Turkey, as layers of soil are removed, the past comes alive. Thousands of years ago, there was a city that was the crossroads of the ancient Roman Empire, a civilization where culture and prosperity went hand in hand, where wealthy citizens built grand villas filled with precious art. But the city met a catastrophic and mysterious end. The Euphrates River is the cradle of civilization. Today, many people here live much as they did thousands of years ago. Two thousand years ago, as this great river flowed across the plains of Eastern Turkey, a handful of ancient cities of the Greek and Roman Empires flourished. Buried somewhere in this remote valley is one of the most spectacular of those cities, a treasure of Ancient Rome, the City of Zeugma. In ancient times, Zeugma was a thriving city, the center of trade routes that spanned the Roman Empire. It stood at the intersection of roads that carried spices, slaves and riches from Persia to the west and India in the south. The only bridge across the entire Euphrates River was at Zeugma. Zeugma was originally settled by the Greeks in 300 BC, but entered its golden age many centuries later when the Romans took over. It then became a vital center of commerce, art and culture. An army of 6,000 soldiers guarded the bridge across the Euphrates to protect the crucial trade routes. It was a fabulously wealthy place, a jewel in the crown of the Roman Empire. Centuries ago, the hills surrounding Zeugma were likely to have looked like this
 dotted with lavish houses and grand public buildings, rich with statues and fabulous artwork. Over the years, the excavation has failed to find anything of real value, yet the archeologists believe many ancient treasures still exist. Now they have just six weeks to find them. Day One begins. The scientists split into two teams to map the site on both sides of the river. With such a short time to work, it's critically important to decide exactly where to dig. All are acutely aware of what is at stake. The first challenge is to search the entire site for fragments of the wall. Its pieces lie scattered around like a giant jigsaw puzzle. Miles of the wall are still buried underground. If there were time, the archeologists would carefully dig out all the walls they could find, to get a clear picture of the size and shape of the city. But this is just not possible.  Piece by piece every new discovery is recorded on paper. Gradually walls and towers begin to take shape. It's clear that the builders of Zeugma used the most sophisticated technology of the time. The walls weren't built in simple, straight lines, but at sharp, defensive angles. This device measures tiny variations in the earth's magnetic field. Normally the magnetic field is at a constant background level, but any large rock or piece of metal under the soil will cause it to change. The two sensors at the end of this pole detect the changes. After just a few days, the archeologists have results that would have taken years of digging. At night they pore over the pictures trying to make sense of them. As the computer images accumulate, they create a three-dimensional map of Zeugma as it once existed. Now it's time to dig, and not a moment too soon. At the dam, construction is almost complete. In the race against time, the scientists are forced to abandon normal archeological procedures. They can't afford to examine each layer inch by inch. They must dig down to the foundations as quickly as possible, logging and recording what they can on the way. This is just an ordinary Roman dwelling. There's no sign of the richly decorated villa they were hoping for. But then the discovery of a network of gullies leads the archeologists to a dramatic insight into the layout of the entire city. They carefully squeeze into narrow passages that lead them further and further under the city. These tunnels were built with amazing precision, and probably have been untouched for 2000 years. Walking directly under the streets and houses of ancient Zeugma, the archeologists realize they have discovered the sewer system of the buried city. The construction resembles classic Greek architecture, suggesting it was built by the earliest settlers of Zeugma in 300 BC. By following the tunnels of the sewer system the archeologists could come up with the ground plan of the entire city. The broad streets of the wealthiest neighborhoods are probably directly above the widest tunnels in the sewer. Every fragment of the villa is carefully drawn and catalogued just as it is found. From the precise location of each fallen column they will later be able to reconstruct what the villa once looked like. Zeugma lies in an earthquake zone, so it's possible the landslide was caused by a natural disaster. But the dates of these coins suggest that the catastrophic fire preceded the landslide and was probably part of the Persian raid. The image on the coin is Philip the Arabian, who was Emperor of Rome in 249 AD, right before the villa was most likely destroyed.  But a luxurious Roman house ought to contain great artistic treasures, unless they were destroyed by the fire and landslide that followed the Persian attack. The archeologists keep digging, but hope is beginning to fade. Over the next three days, a brightly colored and exquisitely designed mosaic is revealed. It takes time, for the mosaic is large, more than 200 square feet. How many more of these historic masterpieces will have to be left behind? The mosaic tells the Greek myth of Pasiphae, who gave birth to a beast called the Minotaur. The Minotaur was half man and half bull. Pasiphae asks Daedalus, a carpenter and the father of Icarus, to build the famous labyrinth to hide the monster from humanity. They have to remove the mosaic from the site to save it from the coming flood. They cover it with glue and then hammer down a thin layer of gauze over the thousands of tiny tiles to hold them in place. Once the glue is dry, the mosaic is cut into pieces for transport to the local museum. Sections of floor are pried from the ground and carefully lifted onto a waiting truck. These discoveries make it possible to visualize in great detail what this villa looked like in ancient times—the central courtyard with its fountain, columns and wall paintings; the elaborate bath house; the ornate dining room with its extraordinary mosaic. One can imagine the family who lived here, gathering with friends for lively discussions and lavish feasts. The villa is the find of a lifetime. But its discovery will always leave the haunting question of what else might have been uncovered, if only there had been more time. With the dam completed and the flooding begun, the waters of the Euphrates River take only a month to reach the villa, and the entire site is now flooded. The precious ancient city of Zeugma, with all its secret treasures, has vanished forever. It was a time of discord in the Christian world. Threatened by the Protestant Reformation, the Roman Catholic Church demanded strict adherence to its dogma, enforced by the violent threat of Inquisition. Fear of heresy was in the air. His early experiments laid the foundation for modern physics, and his observations revealed new truths about the universe. But ambition drove Galileo to question the Church's view of the world and revolutionize our understanding of astronomy. Ironically, Galileo himself was a faithful Catholic and gave his daughter, Virginia, to the Church. Who was this man who saw further than others into the far reaches of the universe? What does his suffering tell us about the recurring clash between religion and science? Galileo's works were banned by the Church for centuries, and not until our own time would his rift with the church be healed. Galileo would pay a terrible price, but his discoveries would change the world. Galileo was born into a world where each morning reaffirmed the common view that the Sun moved around the Earth. This belief was confirmed as the sun appeared to pass overhead each day. It was a view of the universe originally set out by the ancient philosopher Aristotle. In the center sat the static earth, the home of man. The Sun was just one of many heavenly bodies which circled endlessly around it. For the Church, there was also a practical reason to study the heavens. The sky was both a clock and a calendar. Galileo brought his mathematical studies to the University of Padua, 40 miles from Venice, far enough from Rome to be beyond the influence of the Jesuits and their officially approved curriculum. The city of Venice was just a ferry ride from Padua, and it was here that the young professor spent many holidays. Galileo began a liaison with a Venetian woman named Marina Gamba. Little is known about her, but she was far from Galileo's social equal. The affair made his life complicated, but was not unusual even among faithful Catholics. Galileo himself had three illegitimate children. The eldest, Virginia, was born in 1600. Despite these complications, Galileo thrived in the free air of Padua, becoming an ambitious scholar. Galileo set out to turn the Dutchman's toy into a useful device. At first, Galileo was only interested in the optics of the telescope. With his improved lenses he increased its power tenfold. But his lenses did more than magnify. By reshaping these pieces of glass, Galileo would eventually reshape our view of the world. From within the Venetian senate came a handsome order for Galileo to supply the arsenal with spyglasses. Galileo was given a generous lifetime salary for his service to the republic. Part scientist and part self-promoter, for now, his future seemed bright. But soon his telescope would launch a dispute which would threaten to destroy its creator. The moon Galileo saw was Earth-like, and he sketched its features with Earth-like detail. If the surface of a heavenly body resembled the Earth, perhaps the heavens and earth were not as different as everyone thought. In a little more than a week, Galileo had found the first new astronomical bodies to be discovered since ancient times. This discovery clashed with the common belief that the heavens revolved around the earth alone. Eventually it would bring him head to head with church dogma, but for now Galileo was exuberant. Sidereus Nuncius, The Starry Messenger was an enthusiastic announcement of telescopic astronomy. The first printing sold out within days, and news spread across Europe of Galileo and his amazing telescope. Galileo became an advocate for his new astronomy and for scientific observation. But as his fame spread, so did his reputation for arrogance. Modesty never came easily to the young professor. By making the invisible now visible, the telescope was starting to revolutionize astronomy. From ancient times, astronomers had tried to account for the observed motions of heavenly bodies by assuming that they were attached to transparent crystal spheres, rotating sphere within sphere. The Greek astronomer Ptolemy worked out the system in great detail to explain the motions of the Sun, the Moon, the stars, and the planets, all that could be seen with the naked eye. At the center of Ptolemy's intricate system sat the Earth, solid and unmoving. Sixty years before the telescope, a Polish clergyman, Nicholas Copernicus, noticed that the calculations needed to predict the positions of the planets in the sky would be simplified if he assumed that the Sun, rather than the Earth, were at the center of the Universe. In the Copernican system the Earth was never still. It had two separate motions, revolving around the Sun each year and spinning on its axis once each day. Galileo had read Copernicus and already suspected that the Copernican system was correct, but even with his telescope he did not see a way of proving that the Earth moved around the Sun. A copy of the Starry Messenger, Galileo's finest telescope, and a personal plea are dispatched to Florence. A few weeks later a letter was issued from the Medici offices at the Uffizi inviting Galileo to join the Medici Court as mathematician and philosopher. Here he would be at the center of Florentine intellectual and social life. The Medicis were rich and cultured, but they were also beholden to Rome. With strong ties to the Vatican, the family had produced many popes and cardinals. They could not have known the difficulties their new philosopher would bring upon himself. Young nuns like Virginia were expected to loosen their ties to the outside world. Even their families would be kept at a distance. Over the course of 20 years, daughter Virginia would write dozens of private letters to her father from behind the convent walls. Galileo's servants carried the letters in baskets of food or clothing. Many of Virginia's letters survive, although all of her father's responses have been lost. Her letters suggest an enduring bond between the two despite the harsh conditions of convent life. In contrast to his daughter's life, Galileo's was becoming more comfortable and secure enough to take a risk, even in the doctrinaire atmosphere of Florence. Galileo adopted the view that Copernicus was right. The Sun, not the Earth, was the center of our planetary system. Months passed as he struggled for a way to prove it. While he searched for a demonstration, a letter arrived from one of his followers, Benedetto Castelli, suggesting that the planet Venus could hold the key. To the naked eye, Venus was just a point of light, but through his telescope Galileo saw the planet as a disk. Over a period of months Venus changed from a small disk to a larger crescent. Galileo immediately grasped that in a sun-centered system this crescent would appear as Venus circled in an orbit between the sun and the earth. Venus must be revolving around the Sun rather than the Earth. But the argument was just beginning, and Galileo utterly misjudged the opposition. Opportunistic priests in Florence announced from their pulpits that Galileo was spouting dangerous new ideas. A chorus of jealous academics, bruised by Galileo's arrogance joined the clamor. Galileo counted on his Medici patrons to protect him. But that protection started to erode when the Grand Duke Cosimo's mother began to have doubts. Galileo had named the moons of Jupiter for the Medici family, but the Grand Duchess questioned their authenticity. In the Book of Joshua, the Lord halts the movement of the Sun allowing the Israelites a bit more daylight to defeat their enemies. This, and a half dozen other biblical passages, seemed to suggest that it was the Sun which moved, not the Earth. The Grand Duchess Christina worried that her new court philosopher was contradicting the Bible. Galileo's outspoken letter to Madama Christina, intended to resolve the discrepancies between science and the Bible, came to be seen as an assault on the Bible itself. Galileo surely knew what could happen to heretics when the cardinals of the Inquisition organized to purify society by combating heresy. Much of their work was the banning of books, but the Inquisition also had the powers of both torture and execution. Rome's dungeons had seen the end of many heretics, including the infamous Giordano Bruno, fallen priest and occult dabbler in science. Giordano Bruno was a priest and a new age charlatan who denied the divinity of Christ, but like Galileo he had described a vision of the universe which had the Earth spinning around the Sun. Behind Bruno's execution was Rome's greatest Inquisitor, the "Hammer of Heretics," Roberto Cardinal Bellarmine. Now, years later, this same Cardinal Bellarmine was receiving reports about Galileo. Galileo journeyed to Rome in the winter of 1616. As a member of the Medici Court, he became a guest of the Tuscan Ambassador at the palatial Villa Medici. Perched on a hill overlooking the city, from his balcony Galileo could see the Domes of the Vatican as he eagerly awaited his meeting with the Inquisitor, Cardinal Bellarmine. Theologians listened as Galileo confidently made the case for Copernicus. In his letter the ambassador worried that the Medici family might be drawn into an ugly controversy. Galileo actually welcomed the chance to make his case to Cardinal Bellarmine. He had heard that Bellarmine had an interest in astronomy and was fascinated by the telescope. The pious Cardinal Bellarmine had countenanced burning men alive, but he was ethereal and unworldly. Even the ruling families of Italy considered the Cardinal a bit too saintly. For Galileo, counting on the influence of his Medici patrons, the Cardinal's incorruptible piety was not good news. But Galileo never even had a chance to persuade Bellarmine. Three days before his planned meeting with the Cardinal, the Holy Office of the Inquisition met at the Collegio Romano to vote on the theories of Copernicus. The vote was 11 to nothing. The hypothesis that the Earth moved was foolish and absurd. The belief that the sun was the center of the world was a matter of formal heresy. Cardinal Bellarmine would use his meeting with Galileo to deliver the edict. Galileo is forced to turn his back on Copernicus, whose work is added to the Index of Prohibited Books. Galileo had been certain that he could turn the Church to his new astronomy, but instead matters had become much worse. With the stroke of a quill, the Church had banned Copernicus and, for now, muzzled Italy's greatest scientist. If there were to be a struggle between religion and science, religion had won the first round. Galileo vented his frustration in outspoken letters to close friends and supporters. Cardinal Bellarmine may have slammed the door on Copernicus, but his philosophy left one small opening for Galileo to seize upon. The church did not accept Galileo's claim that the phases of Venus proved a Sun-centered universe. So he set out to find physical proof that the earth was moving. For once, Galileo's intuition failed him. Although a link between the tides and the phases of the moon had been observed for centuries, Galileo rejected the idea. For him, the suggestion that the moon could influence events on Earth smacked of astrology or the occult. The search for physical proof of the Earth's rotation would take another 200 years.  If, like a galloping steed, the earth is hurtling through space, why can't we feel the movement? Galileo seized on the paradox that the Earth could spin on its axis fast enough to cause day and night without people sensing the motion. So he devised an intriguing thought experiment. He used a horse to represent the motion of the earth. If a rider dropped a ball while standing still, the ball would, of course, fall straight down, landing beside the horse. But what would happen if the same rider dropped the ball with the horse at full gallop? Despite his troubles with the church, Galileo was still well supported by the Medicis. He moved closer to his daughter, to a hillside villa outside of Florence. The aging Galileo constantly complained of terrible ailments. Somehow, Galileo's every passing need, his ailments, his interests were known to his daughter behind her convent walls. Sacrifice and exhaustion were conditions Sister Maria Celeste knew first hand. Such graceful submission to the ways of the faith was not a path Galileo would follow. He could never emulate his daughter's obedience to the Church, even under the watchful eyes of the Inquisition.  If the Jesuit were right and the spots were independent satellites, then the surface of the sun would remain pristine as doctrine demanded. Galileo produced a series of intricate engravings, recording the daily changes of his sunspots. The continuous movements of the blemishes suggested that the sun might actually rotate on its axis. Galileo knew that his adversaries were wrong. It didn't matter if the Jesuit mathematician wished the sun to be unblemished. Galileo had demonstrated real spots on the surface of the real sun. When news of Urban VIII's elevation reached her convent, Maria Celeste hoped that her father's silencing at the hands of the church would be over. Galileo secretly shared a letter he received from his old friend, the Pope. Galileo made the difficult two-week journey to Rome especially to meet with Pope Urban VIII. The two old friends had a series of conversations as they strolled the paths of the Vatican. So as long as the Copernican view that the Earth moved around the Sun was presented only as a hypothesis, one theory among many, Urban VIII would allow it to be debated. Now 60 years old, he threw himself into his new book. The Pope had given Galileo license to embark on what he hoped would be his most important work. Writing in Italian not Latin, laying out his most persuasive evidence in a witty, popular style, Galileo set out to entertain and win over everyone who read it to the Copernican worldview. Months of writing stretched on as sickness interrupted his work. Finally, after five years, the end was in sight. Galileo finished his great book on Christmas Eve, 1629. It was called Dialogue on the Two Chief Systems of the World. Galileo creates three spirited characters, noblemen of Venice. The first character, the host, prompts a debate between his two talkative guests. One of the visitors clearly speaks up for Copernicus and Galileo. But the other guest, Simplicio, the simpleton, is a comic foil, mouthing the church's doctrines on science and philosophy. The rulers of Tuscany couldn't decide whether to rely on quarantine or on the power of prayer. Just to be certain, they tried both. The Magistry of Public Health enlisted the help of Maria Celeste's convent. Maria Celeste worried about her aging father. As the convent's apothecary, she prepared a medication for him, hoping to shield him from infection. Washing linens in boiling vinegar was seen to provide a measure of defense, although no one knew the reason why. The sisters' cloistered isolation became a benefit, and the infection passed them by. The next spring the epidemic had subsided enough to permit limited communication with the rest of Italy. While Galileo waited, the copies of his Dialogue  were quietly passed among powerful Roman churchmen. But, curiously, Galileo's great admirer, the Pope, may not have actually read it. Instead, Urban VIII heard rumors, rumors that Galileo had put his words into the mouth of a fool, rumors that Galileo had not written a scientific discourse, but a literary satire. Years earlier, when he had strolled through the Vatican gardens with Galileo, the Pope had made the very same argument, saying that the works of God can be beyond human understanding. The Inquisition served a paper on Galileo ordering him to appear in Rome the coming October. The old man tried to delay his trip by claiming ill health. By Christmas, Galileo was again ordered to appear. He could come voluntarily, or he could come in chains. In Rome, Galileo again could see the Vatican from the windows of the Tuscan Embassy, but for months his summons to the Inquisition did not appear. His trial order finally arrived in April. Like most such proceedings, Galileo's was conducted with strict formality and perfect civility. The Inquisition limited the trial to two simple questions of fact
 Did the late Cardinal Bellarmine forbid Galileo to advocate Copernicus when the two faced each other 16 years earlier? And had Galileo violated the Cardinal's injunction by writing his Dialogue? All who read the Dialogue could see that the defense of Copernicus was, by far, the stronger argument in the book. The character Simplicio, mouthing the words of Urban VIII, was really more satire than science. Galileo was forced into a position of false humility and humility was never his style. Galileo was remanded to a small room in the Palace of the Inquisition. It seemed certain that his Dialogue would be banned. The question now became what punishment would befall Galileo himself. News of Galileo's confinement reached Maria Celeste, and she nervously sent off a letter of cautious advice, not knowing if it would ever get to her father. The path Galileo followed to the chambers where he would hear his sentence led through the Cloisters of Santa Maria Sopra Minerva. The walls and ceiling warned heretics what fate might await them. On the morning of his sentencing, Galileo was once more brought before the Inquisition, this time wearing the white robes of a penitent. A settlement was likely worked out. Galileo was given a chance to renounce his errors. Rather than spending the rest of his life in a dungeon, the old man knelt as ordered. The trial of Galileo was over. Waiting in the Tuscan embassy he would not know for months when he would be allowed to return home. Dialogue on the Two Chief Systems of the World was added to the Index of Prohibited Books. It would remain banned for the next 200 years. Galileo had believed that Pope Urban VIII would protect him from censure but the Pope had not. Six months after his trial, news arrived in Florence that Galileo would finally be allowed to return home. It had taken the pleas of the Tuscan Ambassador, the intervention of the Medici family, and the quiet influence of his own daughter. Galileo was home but confined to his own house, unable to teach, travel or even visit his daughter without permission. He signed his letters, "From my prison in Arcetri." Galileo was ordered to recite prayers of penitence each week. Although ailing, Maria Celeste undertook to relieve him of this burden. Although her letters had not dwelled on it, Maria Celeste's physical condition had deteriorated in her father's yearlong absence. At the end of March, news came that Maria Celeste was gravely ill with fever. For the next 10 days, Galileo made the short walk to the convent trying to hold onto her. But late one night she succumbed to dysentery, leaving the world at the age of 33. When Maria Celeste died, it was as if a light had gone out in Galileo's life. Dozens of Galileo's personal letters have survived, but not one of the letters he wrote to his daughter has ever been found. Today, we have only her side of their communication. Fighting advancing blindness and often confined to his bed, Galileo began to reexamine his own early work. Forced to avoid astronomy, Galileo looked back to a time before his telescope, to his brilliant but never published research on the physics of motion. Galileo had spent half a lifetime trying to prove the Earth moves. Now he would come to terms with something much more basic, the mathematics of motion itself. But motion is hard to measure. Galileo reasoned that as balls rolled down slopes they would accelerate just as they did in free fall, but more slowly. Galileo had found a mathematical rule for accurately predicting the motion of objects in the real world, a universal law which applied to any falling bodies. As a young man Galileo had revolutionized astronomy, but at the age of 74, his last great book revolutionized the physics of motion. Within a generation, Newton had built on Galileo's work to devise a set of laws so complete that they could describe the motion of the planets in their orbits and how apples fall from trees. When Galileo was a young man, most people assumed that they lived at the unmoving center of the world. Armed with his telescope, he wrote persuasively that our earth was just one of many planets moving around the sun. The inquisition chose to ban Galileo's Dialogue, but it was powerless to ban Galileo's ideas. The Catholic Church long ago accepted the science of Galileo, but it was not until 1992 that a papal commission reconsidered its handling of the Galileo affair. Saying that faith should never conflict with reason, Pope John Paul II used the very words Galileo had once written in his own defense. The Pope, like Galileo, believed that the scriptures can never err, but theologians can err in their interpretation. The Pope expressed the church's regret that the Galileo affair had contributed to a "tragic mutual misunderstanding" between religion and science. Perhaps anticipating his own revival, the old heretic had scribbled a private warning to his adversaries in his copy of the Dialogue. Galileo was right about the earth moving, but he was wrong about the tides. Learn more about what history has shown to have been his big mistake on NOVA's Web site at PBS.org or America Online, Keyword PBS. March 25, 1944
 Seven Navy airmen embark on a top-secret mission that begins at the top of the world near the Arctic Circle. It's one of the most dangerous missions of World War II. They start the engines to warm up the plane and taxi through ice and snow to the end of the runway. Most of the weight is ordnance, bombs intended for Japanese targets. The plane, Bomber 31, rumbles down a makeshift runway, climbs up into the blinding fog and disappears. Decades pass and the fate of Bomber 31 is all but forgotten. In 1944, five Navy airplanes were readied for a mission as secret as it was dangerous. Even today, few people know about it. The first plane took off without incident. The second plane, Bomber 28, was piloted by James Moore. This time the takeoff was sluggish. At the end of the runway, Moore's plane crashed into the bay and exploded. The last plane to take off that night was Bomber 31. With the fire from Jim Moore's plane lighting the way, Bomber 31 took off into the appalling weather. The flight began at the tip of Alaska's Aleutian archipelago on a tiny island called Attu. The bombing target, 750 miles to the west, was another tiny island called Shumshu at the northernmost tip of the Japanese Kuril Islands. But Bomber 31 never reached its destination and the seven brave men on board that night were never heard from again. Retaking this grim territory became a strategic imperative for the United States. In May of 1943, the fight for Attu began. It would turn out to be one of the bloodiest battles of the Pacific campaign. After nearly three weeks, the exhausted and beaten Japanese soldiers clutched their grenades and pulled the pins. It was the largest mass suicide of the Second World War. From the Battle of Midway to the U.S. offensive at Guadalcanal, the war was raging in the South Pacific, led by General Douglas MacArthur. In the cold north, the airmen of Attu felt cut out of the action—but not for long. American military strategists were hatching a brilliant plan to trick the Japanese into thinking that Tokyo was about to be invaded, not from the south but from the north. The airmen of Attu started bombing raids on the basically uninhabited islands of Shumshu and Paramushir at the tip of Japan's Kuril Islands. Bomber 31, like the rest of the squadron that took off that night, was a PV-1 Ventura, originally designed as a precision bomber. It was a resilient airplane as Navy radioman Rudolph Toney recalls. Attu was 750 miles from Shumshu, which is just south of the Russian Peninsula of Kamchatka and its capital city, Petropavlosk. It was one of the longest over-water bombing missions of the war, and danger was everywhere. If an aircraft ditched in the brutal Bering Sea, the chances of the crew's survival were virtually nil. Wetterhahn looks around for the section of the fuselage that might indicate which PV-1 this was. Below the bureau numbers, at the bottom of the stabilizer, the number "31." Lost to America for more than half a century, Bomber 31 has finally been found. In the airframe, Wetterhahn spies a small reminder of the men who flew in this plane. A U.S. coin, frozen in time. But what happened to the crewmembers? There are no bodies near the wreckage. No skeletal remains are evident. Sam's son, Tom Rains, was only a 10-month-old baby when his father's plane disappeared. For Tom Rains, the discovery of his father's plane has stirred up some strong emotions. Tom wants to see for himself the place where his father disappeared. He and his wife Kathy will soon travel more than 9,000 miles from Ohio to Kamchatka. It will not be an easy trip. He also hopes that some remains of his father's body will be found so he can receive a burial in Arlington Cemetery with full military honors. The United States is unique among governments, spending 100 million dollars a year to bring home the remains of its missing servicemen from around the world. Also en route to Kamchatka is a ten-person Army recovery team, led by forensic anthropologist Ann Bunch. Her job is to search for any remains of the crew that can be found and take them back to the United States for identification. Eight hours after leaving Hawaii, the recovery team arrives in Petropavlosk, the closest city to the crash site in Kamchatka. It's a fairly modern Russian city, but just on the outskirts, the terrain becomes rough and inaccessible. In this land of volcanoes there are few roads, so the team had to switch to helicopter transport. Four weeks of camping and work supplies required many trips. After the campsite is set up, they still have an arduous climb over the shoulder of the volcano to get to the crash site. Two of the dead men were wearing wedding rings.  But the families were never notified and the rings never returned. In fact, no one was told except the KGB. Colonel Konstantin Golumbovsky from the Russian Air Force has tried to get to the bottom of the Soviet side of the story. Colonel Golumbovsky also learned that the Soviet military was called to the crash site. But the state of the wreckage suggests the KGB went further than they needed to make the area safe. A safety sweep of the entire site is required before the recovery team can start looking for human remains. And they find just what they were afraid of, an unexploded 500-pound bomb. The area is roped off because the bomb is still potentially dangerous. Finding human remains in a field filled with rusting relics from a war long past is like looking for a needle in a haystack. But today, even tiny bone fragments can help identify the crew. Like the case of John Hanlon, the co-pilot on Bomber 31. Mary Porciello was John Hanlon's sister. Crucial parts of her genetic make-up are the same as her brother's. Mary's blood will be sent to Ann Bunch's lab. If they find any remains in Kamchatka, the DNA will be compared to see if it matches hers. But no human remains have been found yet. After cutting away part of the plane, the recovery team scours the cockpit, hoping to find some evidence of pilot Walt Whitman or co-pilot John Hanlon. They only detect slivers of human bone. Here, Wetterhahn finds evidence that a projectile came through the exhaust stack and penetrated the area below, crippling the airplane. But what happened to the crew? Did they all go down with the plane? Or did some of them try to parachute out and maybe get captured by the Japanese? Others reported that Tokyo Rose broadcast the name, rank and serial number of every member of the crew, and even used John Hanlon's nickname, Moose. How could the Japanese have such information? There's no hard evidence that any crewmember of Bomber 31 was captured by the Japanese. But Ralph Wetterhahn decides to fly over to Shumshu to see it for himself. The bombing raids of the Kuril Islands proved to be some of the toughest missions of World War II. Fearing an American invasion, these Japanese islands were heavily defended by air and antiaircraft guns in bunkers and boats. This, combined with bad weather, took its toll on the U.S. airmen. On their return trip to Kamchatka, Ralph Wetterhahn and Pentagon investigator Jim MacDougall encounter an incredible site. It's the wreck of another World War II airplane. Wetterhahn and MacDougall decide to investigate. This PV-1 belonged to a different squadron. It was forced down by anti-aircraft fire during a raid on August 20, 1944. Miraculously, its crew escaped with only minor injuries, including radioman Rudolph Toney. Rudolph Toney's pilot deliberately crash-landed on Russian territory, knowing his crew would be safe. Russia allowed crippled American aircraft to land on its soil. Because the Soviet Union was not at war with Japan, the airmen would be officially imprisoned, but secretly returned to the United States. Now they have to get on a helicopter for the short trip to the crash site. These 45 miles will turn out to be the most difficult of their three-day journey. The flight gives Tom an idea of the harsh terrain his father's stricken bomber had to negotiate, especially during the winter, with high winds and temperatures well below zero. But even in the summer the weather is temperamental and can change by the hour, especially in the mountains. A heavy fog moves in and the helicopter crew becomes lost. They land to get their bearings. Back at the crash site, the weather is still clear. And after three weeks of work, the recovery team finally has some luck. One of the local hunters spots what he thinks could be a grave. Perhaps the KGB buried some remains back in the 1960s when they desecrated the site. Wishful thinking? Ann tries to keep an open mind. Three potential gravesites are marked out, and the team starts digging. Will the remains of radioman Sam Crown or the other crewmembers be unearthed here? It will take most of a day to excavate these gravesites. As time passes, anticipation turns to disappointment. No human remains are uncovered. But suddenly, only a few yards closer to the wreckage, there's a genuine breakthrough. Several important bones are found. Out of respect to the families, Ann asked NOVA not to film the bones as they were removed from the ground. Later she explained what they found. The recovery team also found part of a flying boot with navigator Donald Lewallen's name on it. But it was discovered about 300 yards north of the crash site—why so far away? The most likely animal to have removed human remains from the crash site is the brown bear. And there are signs that the bears are coming closer to the campsite. Did bears play a role in the disappearance of the crew? Could that explain the scarcity of human remains at the crash site? It's a chilling thought, and not one that Tom Rains has to contemplate. After traveling for 72 hours, he has only just arrived at the camp. But a fierce storm has followed him there. Overnight, several tents belonging to the recovery team have blown over. Ann's team will catch a Russian helicopter to Petropavlosk. They'll come back in a few days, when the weather clears, to finish up and secure the site. Then, they will return to the laboratory in Hawaii with all the bones they've collected. On board is Major General Roland Lajoie, chief of MIA recovery missions in Russia for the U.S. military. The fate of Tom's father and the rest of the crew of Bomber 31 will be determined here, at the Central Identification Lab in Hawaii, where the bones will be processed. The only way to identify individual remains from these small fragments of bone is to extract their DNA. It won't be easy. The bones are old and so is the DNA. After the bone is cut into small pieces, it's ground up and put into a solution to release the DNA. It's then scanned by a computer and compared with the DNA from blood samples given by family members. They're looking for a genetic match between the two. It will take months to get all the results. But the preliminary reports are turning out better then the lab expected. The second batch of samples contains unique sections of DNA that can be matched to a second individual. But many of the bone fragments collected at the site yielded nothing conclusive. Sadly, Mary Porciello will not get the news she hoped for. None of the DNA matched hers. Her brother, co-pilot John Hanlon, was not identified. But Ralph Wetterhahn has been thinking a lot about what happened on the last flight of Bomber 31. After examining the wreckage, he believes it met enemy fire before reaching its target on Shumshu Island. With the engines crippled, the pilots were looking for a place to land. Japanese war records reveal that the airmen of Attu succeeded. They convinced the Japanese Imperial Command to divert about one sixth of their air strength to defend the Northern Kuril islands from invasion. More than 88,000 American service personnel are missing from conflicts dating back to World War II. Find out more about the U.S. effort to bring them home on NOVA's Website, at PBS.org or America Online, Keyword PBS. As World War II comes to an end, scientists discover the secret of the atom, unleashing death and destruction on an unimaginable scale. Now they are racing to discover the secret of life. In 1962, a Nobel Prize is awarded to James Watson, Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins for their groundbreaking work on DNA. It is one of the greatest achievements in the history of science, often described as the key to unlocking the secret of life. Watson's casting of Franklin as villain works as a literary device, but who she is in his book and who she was in real life are quite different. And unfortunately, Franklin wasn't around to defend herself. She died at the age of 37, a decade before The Double Helix was published and became a best seller. As Francis Crick wrote to Watson, "Your book is misleading and in bad taste. It does not illuminate the process of scientific discovery, it distorts it." Who was the real Rosalind Franklin? And what is her contribution to one of the greatest breakthroughs in science? From an early age, Rosalind stands out. She enjoys memory games, and an aunt writes, "Rosalind is alarmingly clever. She spends all her time doing arithmetic for pleasure, and invariably gets her sums right." While Rosalind excels academically, the outside world is encroaching. The Nazis are on the march. As Jewish refugees flee the Nazi onslaught, the Franklins are active in finding safe haven in England for those who manage to escape. This technique can reveal the hidden atomic structure of matter in its crystalline form. Atoms are too small to see under light microscopes, so crystallographers shoot invisible X-rays at them, which then bounce off, or diffract, onto a detector, such as film.  In 1939, as Franklin steps into the world of science, Cambridge University appoints its first female professor, and Britain prepares for the German invasion. She joined the war effort doing research on coal. Her experiments led to a better gas mask, a valuable contribution to England under attack. She published five landmark papers, still cited today, and she was awarded her Ph.D. She took a flat on a little street behind the Church of St. Sulpice in the 6th arrondissement. She wore the latest in Paris fashion, Dior's "New Look" for the new woman. She shopped in the fresh air markets and took great pleasure cooking for her friends. Franklin was gaining an international reputation, speaking at conferences and publishing in professional journals. An avid hiker, she took trips with colleagues to Norway, Wales and the Alps.  Franklin is offered a position at King's College in London, a highly prestigious research center. She is hired by J. T. Randall, the director of the biophysics labs, to create an X-ray diffraction unit to investigate the structure of proteins. She accepts the offer, but writes to a friend, "To change the banks of the Seine for a cellar on the Strand seems to me quite insane." In 1943, after a decade of work, Oswald Avery and his team at Rockefeller University transferred DNA from a disease-causing strain of bacteria into a harmless strain. The harmless strain turned virulent, strongly suggesting a link between DNA and heredity. DNA was thought to consist of sugar and phosphates in long chains of some unknown shape. It also appeared to have just four other chemical ingredients, called bases. But how could such a simple molecule be responsible for the diversity of all life on Earth? Some believed that discovering the structure of DNA would lead to an answer. That was Franklin's assignment when she arrived at King's College London, in January, 1951. Despite the war-ravaged facilities, King's College was the place to be for DNA research. Maurice Wilkins, a physicist fresh from the Manhattan Project, took some of the first X-ray diffraction images of DNA here. He had to improvise at every step to cope with the lab's antiquated technology. Franklin quickly adjusted to the physical limitations of the lab, but not to the segregated boys' club culture of King's College. To make matters worse, there was confusion over who was in charge, Franklin or Maurice Wilkins. At the time of her arrival, Wilkins was on holiday. While he was gone, his Ph.D. student, Raymond Gosling, was put under Franklin's supervision.  The stressful relationship between Wilkins and Franklin arose from a miscommunication that originated with the director of the lab, J. T. Randall. Sir Aaron Klug, Nobel Prize winner and former president of the Royal Society, was Franklin's last collaborator. After her death, he studied her notebooks and letters, including the one from Randall. The situation was inflamed by a basic personality clash. Franklin—articulate, passionate and always up for a good debate—and Wilkins—soft-spoken, deliberate and shy—just couldn't get along. Yet another barrier was social class and a private life entirely separate from the lab. Despite all the tensions of the lab, Franklin applied herself to the task with single-minded determination, setting her sights on solving the structure of DNA. But now a new player was about to enter the game. Watson goes to a conference in Naples where Wilkins shows one of his early, fuzzy diffraction images of DNA. Watson tries to meet Wilkins and wrangle an invitation to work at King's College. Wilkins does not take the bait. But shortly after, Watson is invited to the Cavendish, a famous research lab at Cambridge University, headed by Nobel Laureate, Sir Lawrence Bragg. There, Watson is assigned an office with another physicist turned crystallographer, Francis Crick, an old friend of Wilkins'. Crick and Watson immediately click. Despite the hostile environment, within months of her arrival at King's, Franklin is producing amazing results. Franklin's discovery that there are two forms of DNA is perhaps the most crucial step toward the ultimate discovery of its structure. The A is a drier, more crystalline form of DNA and produces more detailed images. The B is wetter and how DNA occurs in living cells. It produces a simpler image, but reveals a key clue to solving the structure of DNA. The X shape in the middle is the diffraction signature of a helix. In the audience that day is James Watson, sent by Crick to gather intelligence on Franklin's labors. Crick and Watson are planning to use a different approach to solving the structure of DNA
 model-building. The model of DNA touted by Watson and Crick is an embarrassing failure. Lawrence Bragg, the head of the Cavendish Lab, is humiliated and forbids Watson and Crick to continue their model-making. To Franklin, the incident is an affirmation of her training
 that experimentation and patient analysis of the data will reveal the answer. But what Franklin may not know, is that her unpublished findings will continue to make their way to Watson and Crick. And they are getting there through the deputy director of her own lab, Maurice Wilkins. But while Crick and Watson speculate, Franklin continues to analyze and collect new information. In May, 1952, she sets up the X-ray diffractometer to take an image of the wetter form of DNA, the B. Now, scientists use DNA crystals, which give better results than these microscopic fibers. Twenty of them bundled together are about the thickness of a human hair.  In May, 1952, Franklin's perseverance and exacting techniques pay off, producing the sharpest image yet of the B form of DNA. She labels it "Photo 51" and puts it aside while she continues her work on the A form. But around this time, Franklin will acquire another nickname
 The Dark Lady. She is so unhappy at King's, she arranges to leave. She agrees to finish analyzing her data, write up her findings and stay until the end of the year. In the midst of this transition, someone gives Photo 51 to Wilkins. Meanwhile, at the Cavendish, a new researcher moves into the lab with Watson and Crick
 Peter Pauling, the son of the renowned guru of chemistry from Caltech, Linus Pauling.  The answer was no. Pauling makes some of the same mistakes that Watson and Crick had made on their first model, a three-stranded helix with the bases on the outside. But Pauling's mistake will be discovered as soon as he publishes. Watson then reports that he runs into Maurice Wilkins. Wilkins shows Watson Photo 51. "My mouth fell open and my pulse began to race," Watson says in The Double Helix. It is the clear X pattern, the signature of a helix, that ignites his excitement. But there's more. The number of lines in the photo shows that each twist of the helix has 10 units, or molecular building blocks. And the dimensions of the image correspond to a helix of 34 angstroms per turn. Wilkins gives this crucial information to Watson. On the train back to Cambridge, Watson sketches Photo 51 on his newspaper and reports to Crick. Based on Franklin's data, Crick and Watson go to Lawrence Bragg, the head of the Cavendish lab, and he gives them permission, once again, to build a model. They begin on February 4, 1953. In the MRC report, Franklin places DNA in a class of molecules with a certain type of symmetry, as these simple drawings in her notebook illustrate. The implications of that symmetry would be obvious to an expert like Francis Crick. Two strands, each with the sugars and phosphates running in different directions
 an anti-parallel double helix. But where do the bases go? On the outside, as Watson and Crick depicted in their first model, or the inside, as Franklin had told them?  Now that they have discovered the secret of life, they have another problem to solve. How are they going to prove it? Once again, they need Franklin. She travels to Cambridge to review the model. According to Brenda Maddox, Bragg, of the Cavendish, and Randall, of King's, approach the editors of Nature to engineer a solution. They agree to publish three articles within a single issue
 Watson and Crick's article first, Wilkins and his collaborator next, and last is Franklin and Gosling's article. Its position at the end suggests Franklin's findings merely confirm Watson and Crick's model instead of providing the essential data used to formulate it.  Sir John Maddox, later editor of Nature for two decades, shows how Franklin's contribution was obscured by Watson and Crick with a single guarded sentence. Franklin had written her own article a month before she saw the model. Inserted by hand into the original text is the sentence, "Thus our general ideas are consistent with the model proposed by Crick and Watson." Indeed, her ideas were consistent with their model, because they largely based their model on her ideas. In fact, Rosalind Franklin could be said to be Watson and Crick's unknowing, and unrecognized, collaborator. By the time the articles appeared in Nature, on April 25, 1953, Franklin had taken her new position at Birkbeck College in London. Franklin's virus work secured her international reputation and brought many invitations to speak in the United States. In 1956, she celebrated her 36th birthday while visiting universities in California, and climbed Mt. Whitney, one of the highest peaks in North America. But near the end of her trip, Franklin was suffering from severe abdominal pains. On her return to England she was diagnosed with cancer. There is speculation that her work with X-rays may have triggered the disease. Don Caspar, an American colleague, recalls her struggle to climb from the basement lab to her fifth floor office upstairs.  Her epitaph reads "Scientist
 her research and discoveries on viruses remain of lasting benefit to mankind." She died April 16, 1958. That same day, the London Times carried an article acclaiming her virus model, which was unveiled at the Brussels World Fair. In 1968, James Watson published The Double Helix, his personal account of the discovery of the structure of DNA. In his book, Watson casts Franklin as uncooperative, unattractive and "incompetent in interpreting X-ray pictures." And yet, Watson admits he needs her findings. He even boasts of using her work without her knowledge or permission, saying, "Rosy, of course, did not directly give us her data. For that matter, no one at King's realized they were in our hands." Franklin's family and colleagues protested Watson's portrayal of, as one put it, "that gifted girl who could not defend herself." Watson declined NOVA's request for an interview. Those who admire Franklin take solace in her uncompromising dedication. For Rosalind Franklin, the joy of science was in the work itself and its ultimate reward, the betterment of humankind. This is a book that could have changed the history of the world. It contains the revolutionary ideas of a genius who was centuries ahead of his time
 Archimedes. But interpreting Archimedes' manuscript proved to be more difficult than anyone had imagined. The nearly invisible tracings of his words lay under the writings of a medieval prayer book. As scientists work to recover the text from this fragile document, they are discovering that Archimedes was further ahead of his time than they had ever believed. If his secrets had not been hidden for so long, the world today could be a very different place. A story of intrigue, up next on NOVA, Infinite Secrets. He is legendary as the man who made a discovery in the bath, and shouted "Eureka! I have found it!" while running naked through the streets of his town. And what he has to say is the culmination of a remarkable journey, one that began two thousand years ago. The story starts around 300 B.C., on the island of Sicily, where Archimedes lived in Syracuse, a city-state ruled by Greece. His father sent him to study in the scholarly center of the world, Alexandria, Egypt, where he learned from the writings of Aristotle, Plato and Euclid. Archimedes soon revealed an extraordinary genius for mathematics. On one particular day, he was trying to solve a problem about a gold wreath that had been given to the King of Syracuse. The King suspected that the goldsmith had slipped in some cheaper, lighter silver. The goldsmith could easily have disguised his deceit by making the wreath bigger so it weighed the same as it would if it were pure gold. What he had discovered was the Principle of Liquid Displacement, and a way to prove that the King's wreath was too big to be pure gold.  Not only did he excel at mathematics, but he was an inventor as well. Many of his ideas are used in machines today, but he was best known and feared for his weapons of war. But his arsenal of war machines did not end there. Until Archimedes, a catapult could only hurl its missile a fixed distance, called its "range." As his reputation grew, so did the challenges. But Archimedes' true love was mathematics. He devised an ingenious method using straight lines to measure a circle, finding the value for Pi. It's one of the most widely used mathematical values today.  The circumference lies between the perimeters of the outer and inner polygons, which can be measured because they have straight sides. Now he can estimate how many times the length of the diameter—also a straight line—will fit around the circumference. His answer was 3.14 times, a very good approximation for what is called Pi. Obsessed by mathematics, there was no problem too ambitious for Archimedes. He even tried to calculate the number of grains of sand to fill the universe. The answer? Ten followed by 62 zeros. Ancient historians reported that Archimedes would become ecstatic as he discovered more- and more-complex mathematical shapes. Archimedes' brilliance caused jealousy among other mathematicians, whom he feared would take credit for his ideas. But tragically, Archimedes' genius had brought him to the attention of the Romans, who were eager to capture him. When they finally managed to invade Syracuse, instructions were issued to take Archimedes prisoner.  He was more than 70 years old at the time. Archimedes' death, in 212 B.C., brought a golden age in Greek mathematics to an end. But many of Archimedes' writings did survive, copied by scribes, who passed on his precious mathematics from generation to generation, until, in the 10th century, one final copy of his most important work, called The Method, was made. The ancient works of a mathematical genius were systematically consigned to oblivion. Washed clean, reused and written over, the manuscript had become what's known as a palimpsest. It began a new life as a book of prayers at the Mar Saba monastery in the Judean desert in the Middle East. And so Archimedes' book, The Method, lay hidden in the library tower of the monastery while the rest of the known world moved on. It was hundreds of years before the palimpsest was heard of again, mysteriously turning up in a library in Constantinople. The library catalogue listed no author, but did include several lines from the original manuscript. These caught the eye of Greek expert Johan Ludwig Heiberg who realized they could only come from one source
 Archimedes. Determined to find out more, he went to Constantinople in 1906 to take a closer look. Heiberg wasn't allowed to remove the manuscript from the library, so he asked a photographer to take pictures of every page, and from these photos, he attempted to reconstruct Archimedes' work. It was an incredibly difficult task. Heiberg's discovery revealed ideas that had never been seen before. What Heiberg had stumbled across was a book called The Method. It was just like going inside Archimedes' brain. Here, Archimedes didn't just give the answers, but for the very first time he wrote down his innermost thoughts, revealing how he'd carried out his work. The Method revealed that Archimedes had come up with a radical approach that no mathematician had come close to inventing. In his head, he had dreamed up an entirely imaginary set of scales to compare the volumes of curved shapes. He used this to try and work out the volume of a sphere. Using very complex mathematics in his head, in which he imagined cutting the shapes into an infinite number of slices, Archimedes was able to work out how to balance the objects on the scale. Working out volumes using infinite slicing suggested that Archimedes was taking the first step towards a vital branch of mathematics, known as calculus, 1,800 years before it was invented. Building on Archimedes' discoveries, scientists, beginning with Newton and Leibnitz, created the calculus we know today
 the mathematics of change, including motion. It's used to calculate everything from the movement of planets to the flight path of a spacecraft. It is a form of mathematics essential for scientists and engineers. Twenty-first century technology depends on it. But why had a single page, and only a single page, of the Archimedes palimpsest turned up in Cambridge? A clue lay in a collection of papers that were handed over to the university, papers that had belonged to a scholar called Constantine Tischendorf, a man of few scruples. When Tischendorf discovered the palimpsest he was tempted to examine it in much more detail. At the turn of the 20th century, Heiberg only had a magnifying glass to read the manuscript. Now Nigel Wilson had the advantage of modern technology. This tantalizing high-tech glimpse of a single page revealed how much more could be gleaned from Archimedes' work if only they knew where the entire manuscript could be found. Amazingly, Felix realized that the owners lived just around the corner, so he set off to examine the book. The owners had an unusual story to tell. In the 1920s, a member of their Parisian family had traveled to Turkey. He was an amateur collector and somehow had acquired the manuscript in Constantinople. All the time that it had been assumed lost, the palimpsest had been lying in the family's Paris apartment. But now they had decided to sell the book. Felix had to decide how much the manuscript was worth. The manuscript sold for far more than even Felix had predicted. An anonymous billionaire paid two million dollars. But it didn't take long for Noel to realize there was a problem. Will Noel quickly put a team together from all over the world to try to rescue the book
 Greek scholars, image experts, and a conservationist. And the thoughts of Archimedes are obscured by other problems, as the team quickly discovered. On several pages of the palimpsest there are mysterious illustrations which completely cover over the text. Curiously, Heiberg made no mention of these pictures when he studied the manuscript in 1906, so the conservation team showed these illustrations to Byzantine expert John Lowden, in London. Lowden found that the miniatures in the 12th century Gospel book were forgeries and had been copied from a French book. When Lowden saw the illustrations in the Archimedes manuscript he thought they looked very similar to the forgeries in the Gospel book. He suspected that this same French book had been used to forge the pictures in the palimpsest. Back in Baltimore, Abigail Quandt did a test to see how the forger copied these paintings into the manuscript. Quandt did the same experiment with the other three black-and-white images. She found that each of them was precisely the same size as those in the palimpsest. The forger must simply have traced the images. Much about this forger remains a mystery, but John Lowden's investigation has been able to reveal one vital clue. But why would someone have spent so long carefully putting forgeries into this manuscript? Removing the forgeries would compromise the text underneath, so they will remain for now. But the delicate task of cleaning the manuscript and attempting to recover the precious Archimedes text has begun. To study each page fully, Quandt has to remove it from its binding in the book. This is relatively new binding, probably done in the last 100 years, and removing it has turned out to be far more important than anyone could have realized. In 1906, when Heiberg studied the text, it had been impossible to read the lines in the center of the binding. Only by taking the book apart, can the writing be seen. And examining the original photos that Heiberg took of the palimpsest has also shown there was something else that he missed. Some of the most important pages of the manuscript were never photographed at all. Recovering the words of Archimedes is a huge technical challenge. Tackling the problem are teams from Johns Hopkins University and the Rochester Institute of Technology. Their latest approach uses a combination of visible and ultraviolet lights to try and make the Archimedes text as simple to read as possible. The Archimedes text shows up far more clearly than before. It now appears as the red writing, much easier to read. One of the most exciting things to emerge already is the diagrams. The drawings are providing a real insight into Archimedes' thinking and reveal the especially important role that diagrams played in Greek mathematics. But the diagrams are only the beginning. Image after image of the original writing is now emerging. Will Noel rapidly e-mails the pictures throughout the world to awaiting Greek scholars and mathematicians who attempt to decipher the text. Trying to piece together the faint red words of Archimedes is an incredibly painstaking task. Professors Netz, Wilson and Natalie Tchernetska are meeting to try to decipher the pages of the manuscript together. The painfully slow process of unraveling the text will take years, but already Reviel Netz has made one very important new discovery by close examination of a proof in the Archimedes text. In it, Archimedes was trying to work out the volume of an unusual shape by dividing it into an infinite number of slices. A breakthrough because Archimedes had come up with a set of rules for dealing with infinity. He'd worked out a system for calculating the value of each slice and then adding up an infinite number of them. It was clear that Archimedes had a made a huge leap beyond ancient mathematics toward a modern understanding of infinity. Even today infinity is a concept that mathematicians can struggle to deal with. It was Archimedes' work with infinity that ultimately led him to the beginnings of calculus. The new findings reveal that Archimedes was a more sophisticated thinker and closer to modern science than anyone had realized. It's amazing to think that a branch of mathematics so crucial  to progress and human advancement was first begun by a man who died over 2,000 years ago. But perhaps the most interesting question of all is what might have happened if this document had not been lost for a millennium
 supposing it had been available to those mathematicians of the Renaissance? It's an extraordinary question
 if scientists had had access to this document, would mathematics be far more advanced now? Who knows how different the modern world might look, and all because of something written by a man in the 3rd century B.C. During the conflict in Iraq, the U.S. military could claim at least one undisputed victory
 wounded American soldiers survived their combat injuries in record numbers. In Vietnam, one out of every four wounded died. In Iraq, at times, the number would shrink to one out of seven. These advanced medical centers are transported in containers and can be set up just about anywhere. During the Iraq war, five CASHs were sent to the region. One year later, NOVA looks back at the experiences of two of these units. Life and Death in the War Zone, right now on NOVA. Five weeks before the start of the Iraq war
 at their base in Fort Carson, Colorado, the elite 10th Combat Support Hospital, or CASH, has spent months preparing for a mission to attack Iraq through Turkey. About 550 people, doctors, nurses, technicians & support staff, will uproot their lives to face an unknown danger. Powell's second in Command is Colonel Dave Lounsbury. Based at Walter Reed Medical Center in Washington, Lounsbury is the editor of the Army's combat medicine textbooks. Like most military doctors, he joined the service to pay his way through medical school. These doctors and nurses normally work at military hospitals, with jobs just like their civilian counterparts'. Now, on the eve of war, they're supplied with more than just stethoscopes and scalpels. The entire staff has to practice protecting themselves against chemical warfare, at this point considered a real risk. They are preparing to treat mass casualties on a contaminated battlefield. Sergeant Ramirez isn't worried about leaving his family behind; he's married to another member of the 10th. The couple will be going to war together. But on the 3rd of March, after three months' intensive preparation, the 10th CASH's mission is put on hold when Turkey refuses access to American forces. The 10th is forced to watch the first advances on television. Finally, the unit is assigned a new mission, to support the army invading from Kuwait. On the 30th of March, two weeks after the start of the war, the 10th Combat Support Hospital leaves for the Gulf. Despite all their preparation, what they encounter will be completely unexpected. In the first two weeks of the war, it's already clear that U.S. casualties are relatively light. As American troops take Baghdad on the 9th of April, there have been 87 U.S. soldiers killed, and a few hundred wounded in action. The survival rate for the coalition wounded is high. For the first time, ceramic body armor is worn by most combat troops, and total air supremacy means any casualties can be quickly evacuated. Major Chris Niles, an anesthesiologist, has left a wife and two daughters back in Florida. He's relieved to finally have a mission. Without any escort, the staff of the 21st CASH heads for a captured airbase in Balad, northwest of Baghdad. The three-day drive takes them through the heart of the recent fighting. The 21st CASH is split into two units. The smaller unit goes to northern Iraq, while the larger section will set up here, at the Balad airbase. The man in charge is Sergeant First Class Renaldi Toledo. A senior medic with 22 years' Army service under his belt, Sergeant Toledo was just two weeks from retirement when he was mobilized to come to the Gulf. The operating room is in one of the containers that folds out to form a space three times its original size. But this is still dangerous territory. During the night, the base comes under attack. After a sleepless night, many are trying to recover from their first encounter with hostile fire. The CASH's sleeping quarters don't provide much protection from enemy fire or from the elements. All the living conditions are primitive. The latrines are nothing more than a public hole in the ground. In time, the 21st will get proper latrines, showers and laundry facilities, but creature comforts take second place. The priority is getting the hospital ready to treat casualties. By the afternoon of the third day all that's left is to put the finishing touches on the hospital. With just a couple of hours to go until the 72-hour deadline, the commander of the CASH, Colonel James Bruckart, makes a final inspection. It doesn't take long before the first serious U.S. casualty arrives. Private First Class David Mason, from the 101st Airborne division, has broken both his ankles in a bad fall. The orthopedic surgeon is concerned that he will face long-term disability. David's career as a combat soldier is over. He has to be evacuated because the CASH is not equipped to provide the complex operations and long-term care he needs. Major Doug Prevost is the chief orthopedic surgeon for the 21st CASH's Mosul unit. The son of a special forces Sergeant Major, he's a graduate of West Point and is a father of five, himself. Ala has endured three weeks without any antibiotics, and Major Prevost soon detects that his wounds are dangerously infected. All that Major Prevost can do is clean the wounds of all shrapnel and cut out any infected tissue. Clean conditions and antibiotics may help control the spread of the infection. After so long without proper treatment, the outlook for Ala is poor. The CASH has not had to deal with the mass U.S. casualties they'd prepared for. So far, the injuries are mostly minor
 scorpion stings...	...a variety of cuts and bruises, and several heat-related injuries. These are the typical cases on May 1st, when President Bush addresses the nation. But even after May 1st, seriously injured Iraqis continue to appear at the CASH, seeking care. In the middle of the night a young Iraqi is brought in, critically injured by a grenade. This is the kind of life or death combat casualty that the CASH is set up for. Shrapnel has torn into his body. He is dying from blood loss through multiple wounds. His heart stops before he reaches the operating room. Major Betty Kim, a cardiothoracic surgeon, cuts his chest open and massages his heart by hand. It is now a race against time to find the source of the bleeding and stem the flow. After fifteen minutes, it's clear that major blood vessels behind the bowel have been severed. Another surgeon, Major Yong Choi, pinches the leaking vessels to stop the flow, but even this is not enough. The man is hemorrhaging faster than they can squeeze plasma into him. Then his heart stops again. As a last resort they try to shock it into action... ...but to no avail. After three days, the doctors' efforts have made a remarkable difference for Ala, the young Iraqi soldier with wounded legs. The cleaning and antibiotics have saved his limbs. Private First Class Torin Howling Wolf is a Cherokee who grew up in the White River Tribe, in Kansas. Howling Wolf and his colleagues have saved Ala's legs and made a friend out of an enemy soldier. But Ala needs long-term rehabilitation and further surgery. The CASH is not set up to provide this. He'll have to be sent back into the devastated Iraqi healthcare system that has failed him once already. David is flown down to Baghdad, where he'll be put on a plane to Germany. The medics aren't quite sure whether they should be treating this girl. The doctors, nurses and medics, by training and inclination, would treat everyone, but the choice is not always theirs to make. The Army provides guidelines, but how they're enforced on the ground is left to the discretion of the CASH commander. Today, officers from the Army's medical brigade, which oversees the CASH, are on their way to the local hospital in Mosul. Iraqi doctors are hoping that they'll approve the transfer of some injured patients to the CASH. The hospital has survived most of the looting intact. Many of the doctors are highly skilled, but their expertise is useless without supplies. In contrast, the CASH is well equipped, so the Iraqi doctors are eager to transfer any patients that might meet the Army's guidelines. This soldier was shot in the stomach a month ago. After multiple operations, his wounds still have not healed. The doctors are worried that without clean dressing and antibiotics, the patient will die from his infected wounds. He was shot by Kurdish coalition fighters under the control of U.S. forces. But that doesn't appear to be enough. In this case, injuries caused by America's allies don't guarantee admission to a CASH. This young man has been partially paralyzed from the neck down. He is one of Iraq's Christian minority. This time, it seems, U.S. forces are directly involved. His mother says their village was bombed by American planes. Even though coalition forces may have contributed to the injuries, the medical brigade concludes that both patients are in stable condition, so the CASH, designed primarily as a trauma center, is not the place for them. But when two young Iraqis arrive with life threatening burns from exploded ordnance, there are no questions asked. They're in good hands
 Colonel Bob Lyons is the chief plastic surgeon at Brook Army Medical Center in San Antonio, home to the military's only specialized burn unit. But that won't happen here. There's no fully-functioning burn unit in all of Iraq, even at the CASH. After cleaning him up and giving him antibiotics, all the doctors can do for the patient is try to ease his pain. To keep the patient completely still, the doctors would like to use a paralytic agent called "vercuronium," but it's in short supply. Three days later the badly burnt young man dies. Some of the doctors are asked to be gatekeepers, to judge who gets treatment and who doesn't. Major Nhat Nguyen-Minh, a general surgeon who escaped Vietnam to come to America in 1978, goes to the front gate to assess a patient. While Major Niles struggles over how the resources of the CASH are deployed, another fully equipped American hospital is sitting, unused, in the Kuwaiti desert. Weeks after arriving in the Gulf, Colonel Powell's 10th CASH is still waiting for a mission. Colonel Lounsbury hasn't treated a single combat casualty. The staff of the 10th CASH were never given the humanitarian mission they craved. After four months in Kuwait, the 10th Combat Support Hospital will be sent back to Colorado, though some staff and supplies will go to Iraq. It's a challenge to help Najla in a combat hospital equipped to treat soldiers, not children, but no one wants to back away from this case. A plane is due in the following day to take Najla to America. If Major Niles can get her stabilized overnight, she will get the best care in the world. The next morning, Najla is getting worse. Major Niles and the team are now struggling to get her ready for her flight to America. There's a medevac plane on its way, but Major Niles is worried Najla may be too ill to travel. Her extreme malnourishment could lead to complete organ failure. With no time to lose, Major Niles asks for blood tests to ensure that Najla will survive the trip. He asks the lab to test for electrolite levels to check her metabolic condition and for arterial blood gases to see if she'll be able to breathe unassisted on the plane. When he comes back to the intensive care ward, it's too late. After NOVA left Iraq in May, 2003, attacks on American soldiers increased dramatically, and the wounded flooded the Combat Support Hospitals in the region. Since they opened their doors, the two units of the 21st have treated more than 30,000 patients. At the dawn of the 20th century, there is no hiding from New York City's newly powerful Department of Health. And with good reason. The city's slums are overflowing with poor immigrants. Conditions are horrific. Infectious disease is out of control. But not here—Oyster Bay, Long Island, is another world altogether, a place upper crust New Yorkers go to escape the city. But suddenly this privileged enclave becomes vulnerable. A deadly disease, typhoid fever, strikes the household of a wealthy banker. How it got here is a mystery that confounds the experts. Only within the last twenty years have health officials come to understand that disease is caused by invisible microbes or germs. This knowledge will lead them to an unsuspecting Irish immigrant, a servant named Mary Mallon. They call her "Typhoid Mary." Her story will make history and raise challenging questions we still face today.  An innocent victim or a murderous villain? The tragic story of The Most Dangerous Woman in America, right now, on NOVA. August, 1906
 in this luxurious vacation home in Oyster Bay, Long Island, a young girl, Margaret Warren, is gravely ill with typhoid fever. She has the best care, but without a cure, all anyone can do is try to bring down her fever. This is the last thing Charles Warren, banker to the Vanderbilts, expected when he rented a house for his family in this exclusive seaside resort. Typhoid fever is extremely contagious. First the youngest daughter became ill, then two maids, the mother, another daughter, and finally, the gardener. How could a disease of the slums strike this wealthy community? At the turn of the 20th century, the most crowded neighborhood in the world is New York City's Lower East Side. It's even more crowded than Calcutta. With few connections to city water or sewers, the tenements lack even basic sanitation. Infectious diseases like smallpox, diphtheria, tuberculosis and typhoid fever kill thousands each year.  The symptoms of typhoid can be severe
 weeks of fever, headache, diarrhea and delirium. One out of 10 dies of the disease. But the cause of the disease is no longer a mystery. Thirty years earlier scientist Louis Pasteur electrified the world by proving that bacteria, microbes invisible to the naked eye, cause disease. Typhoid fever comes from salmonella typhi, bacteria that grow in the intestinal tract and are shed in the feces. In 1892, New York City set up the country's first bacteriology laboratory devoted to public health.  In Oyster Bay, where even President Teddy Roosevelt summers, the threat of a typhoid epidemic is terrifying. Experts are called in to investigate. They know typhoid fever is caused by contaminated food or drink. They suspect the plumbing in the house and put dye in the toilet to see if it contaminates the drinking water. It doesn't. They check the local shellfish to see if the bay is polluted with sewage. It isn't. They examine the milk supply in case it is contaminated. It, too, is free of bacteria. The source of the outbreak remains a mystery. That winter, the Thompsons learn about a freelance civil engineer known for his ability to track down the source of disease. Thirty-seven-year-old George Soper is confident and ambitious. Soper begins by reviewing the results of the earlier investigation.  Knowing it takes up to three weeks after exposure to become sick with the disease, Soper uncovers his first clue. Soper also knows the bacteria can survive on uncooked food only.   The cook is a 37-year old Irish immigrant who works for wealthy families in New York.  Soper sets out to find the cook. The employment agency that placed her with the Warren's does not know where she is but directs him to some of her previous employers. What he discovers astounds him. How is this possible? Has Mary been spreading typhoid bacteria for years without ever appearing to be sick?  If Soper is right, the cook would be the first American identified as a healthy carrier of typhoid fever. It would be a major discovery and make his career. To prove his case, Soper needs specimens from the cook. In March, 1907, he learns Mary is working for a family on Park Avenue. Typhoid too is already in residence. A chambermaid has just been taken to the hospital and the family's only child is in critical condition. Mary helps nurse the girl. Soper's account of their meeting is almost theatrical. Like most people of her time, Mary Mallon does not understand the cause of disease. Miasmas and the filth that caused them were thought to be concentrated in the tenements overflowing with immigrants. With the population doubling every decade, city services were unable to cope. Uncollected garbage, animal carcasses, back alley privies, clogged sewers and household waste made conditions unbearable. Cleaning up the city became a moral crusade. In 1895, a Department of Sanitation was created proclaiming, "Cleanliness is next to Godliness." It recruited an army of street cleaners, the White Wings.  At the same time, public health is shifting its focus from brooms to bacteriology. George Soper is part of that change.  Mary Mallon was born in 1869, in County Tyrone, one of the poorest regions of Ireland. Mary's employers are unaware that their cook may have brought typhoid fever into their home.  But Soper alone does not have the authority to force Mary to cooperate. Trained as a physician, Dr. S. Josephine Baker is one of the Department of Health's roving inspectors. In the home where Mary Mallon works, the daughter dies of typhoid fever. Mary must be taken in for testing. Mary is taken to Willard Parker Hospital, an infectious disease facility for the poor.  At New York City's pioneering Bacteriology Laboratory, scientists test Mary's specimens using the most advanced tools and techniques. Samples are placed in an incubator to see if bacteria grow. The results are unambiguous. Soper has made a major breakthrough in the battle against disease, proving that Mary harbors the bacteria even though she insists she has never had typhoid fever. In most cases of typhoid fever, the body is host to a microbial battle where there is a clear winner. If the bacteria win, the patient dies; if the immune system wins, the typhoid bacteria die. But in the case of a healthy carrier, there is no clear winner. The immune system protects the body from infection, but the bacteria continue to live. Mary, with no symptoms at all, is as contagious as someone sick with the disease. Still, the story makes front page news. To protect Mary's identity the Department of Health gives the newspaper a false name. But Mary cannot escape a visit from George Soper. He is anxious to learn when she was exposed to typhoid and how often she has passed it on. What should health officials do? They can't let Mary return to cooking, but how can they stop her? Typically, poor people with infectious diseases are sent to a quarantine island, and that's what they do with Mary. North Brother Island sits in the East River, a few hundred yards offshore from the South Bronx. This is the site of the City's largest quarantine facility, Riverside Hospital. Most of the patients are sick with tuberculosis. They must stay here until they recover or die. Mary is confined to a small cottage on the island. Not everyone in public health believes Mary's quarantine is justified. Dr. Milton Rosenau, Director of the national Hygienic Laboratory in Washington, and other prominent scientists object to her incarceration. But the Department of Health is determined not to let Mary go. Instead, doctors try to cure her with experimental drugs and procedures.  Mary's doctors have a hunch, incorrect as it turns out, that removing the gallbladder will cure her. Mary is kept on North Brother Island, but wages a steady battle. She writes letter after letter to Biggs, Soper and Baker pleading for her freedom. Two years go by. Mary is even more desperate to regain her freedom. In June, 1909, Mary and a young Irish lawyer, George O'Neill, file suit in the New York Supreme Court demanding her release.  A few days later, publisher William Randolph Hearst tells Mary's story in his New York American. He may even be financing her legal case to sell newspapers. This time her identity is revealed but Typhoid Mary is the name that sticks. July, 1909
 Mary Mallon leaves North Brother Island, for the first time in two years, to plead her case before the New York Supreme Court. The Department of Health defends its position. Mary goes into court with some ammunition of her own. Using her boyfriend Briehof as a courier, she has been sending specimens for months to the Ferguson Laboratory in Manhattan. The results contradict the Health Department's. Occasionally the specimens of a healthy carrier do not contain bacteria, which may explain Mary's results. In any event, the court rules against her.  Several leading public health officials are outraged at Mary's continued incarceration. Charles Chapin in Rhode Island declares it "a discredit on public health work." In New York, the Department of Health is feeling the pressure. In 1910, Mary's fortune changes. New York City hires a new Health Commissioner, Ernst Lederle. Lederle releases Mary. She must report in regularly and can never again work as a cook. He even finds her a job at the bottom of the domestic ladder. Mary's boyfriend, Briehof, dies soon after her release; she is on her own, barely able to make a living. By that time, health officials have a bigger problem on their hands. They have come to realize that at least 3 percent of people who get typhoid fever become carriers after they recover. That's impossible, so the Department of Health focuses on those who pose the greatest risk, food handlers. Most healthy carriers escape detection unless they cause an outbreak. In March, 1915, typhoid fever strikes the city's prestigious Sloane Maternity Hospital. Twenty-five doctors, nurses and staff come down with the disease; two die. The hospital calls in George Soper. Department of Health officers trace Mary to a house in Queens. There is no sympathy now for the woman whose name is synonymous with disease. One of the women here, the second from the left, is thought to be Mary Mallon. Adjusting to life on North Brother Island, Mary even makes friends with some of the doctors and nurses.  Three years after her return, the Department of Health occasionally allows Mary to take the ferry into New York.  While Mary is in quarantine, the Department of Health develops a more flexible approach to healthy carriers. Food handlers are sometimes retrained or paid to stop working. Even uncooperative carriers are not punished the way Mary Mallon is.  On the island, Mary is tested regularly for typhoid. She is still a carrier. Eventually she is given a job as a lab technician at Riverside Hospital. In 1932, her supervisor poses here with Mary at age 62. After 26 years on North Brother Island, Mary Mallon died in 1938. She was 69 years old. She had given 47 people typhoid fever; three of them died. Mary never accepted she was the cause. Though Mary Mallon is long forgotten, "Typhoid Mary" is not. She remains a potent symbol of our fear of disease and of the dilemma over how far we should go to protect ourselves. On a cold night in March, 1944, captured Allied airmen broke out from a secret tunnel from a prison camp the Nazis thought was escape-proof. Their breakout was immortalized in The Great Escape, a famous movie, starring Steve McQueen. As a cat and mouse game, it was deadly serious, with the Nazis determined to make escape impossible.  Where prisoners once used bare hands, archaeologists will use backhoes to hunt for a secret escape tunnel the Germans never found. With veterans who worked on the tunnels watching, the excavation will reveal the incredible exploits of the prisoners. Up next on NOVA, a classic tale of courage and ingenuity, the real Great Escape.  Beneath the trees of this forest, tangled in the roots, lie the clues to a dark past. This was the site of Stalag Luft III, one of the most notorious prisoner of war camps run by the Nazis. At the height of the Second World War, these woods echoed with the sound of young Allied airmen who had been shot down over enemy territory. Davy Jones, along with the rest of his crew, was transported to Germany to become a prisoner of war.  The Germans created a top security camp, called Stalag Luft III. Built near the town of Sagan, in German-occupied Poland, the camp's location was ideal. Any escapees would have to travel hundreds of miles to reach freedom. It was designed to be the Nazi's most escape-proof prison. Peter Doyle and Larry Babits, the team leaders, are using aerial photographs and maps left behind by the prisoners. They've located the remains of a hut, beneath which, they believe, lies a secret tunnel. The tunnel is thought to be 30 feet down, so it's going to be hard to find. They will need to dig a massive hole. Most P.O.W.s were obsessed with finding the best way out. One of them was Charles Huppert, a pilot from Indiana, who still thinks about escape. In fact, escape attempts were the obligation of every Allied officer.  Individual escapes were an irritation to the Germans, but a mass breakout could tie up thousands of troops. Playing cat and mouse with the German guards became a way of life for prisoners like Walter Morison. Because of the Geneva Convention, escaped prisoners were not overly concerned about getting caught. Prisoners often fraternized with their guards, who were from the German Air Force, the Luftwaffe. One even appeared in a play. But the jolly interplay between both sides would not last forever. What began as a game became deadly serious. In the remains of the washroom where they think "Dick" began, they've uncovered what looks like a drainage sump. They want to find clues that confirm this is no ordinary washroom drain. The water at the bottom of the sump was a brilliant disguise for the tunnel entrance. It made the trap door to Dick almost invisible. The prisoners made their own movable concrete slab, which slid out when they needed to climb down the tunnel shaft. Just a few inches below the surface, the archaeologists discover something that makes their heart skip a beat. Immediately, Larry and Peter grasp the significance of what is no ordinary concrete slab. Once the prisoners had created the trapdoors, they were ready to start digging the tunnels, but there was a major problem to overcome. The experience of guarding Allied troublemakers had taught the German guards to be vigilant. They even buried microphones around the perimeter of the camp to detect digging. In the early days of Stalag Luft III, there was only a handful of captured American pilots. Among them was Davy Jones, who became a tunneler on "Dick." As the archaeologists dig deeper, another problem emerges that was all too familiar to the tunnelers on the Great Escape. Below the tree roots and top soil, there was nothing but sand. It was so cramped, there was not even enough room to turn around, so diggers worked in teams of two. Although the soft sand was easy to dig, there was always the danger of collapse. Tunnels had to be shored up using wooden boards. As the tunnels grew longer, the prisoners made a personal sacrifice to find enough timber. The two-foot bed boards dictated the dimensions of the tunnels, one board high and one board wide. Even with the wooden shoring, tunnelers were always at risk of being buried alive.  As the hole gets deeper and wider, the archaeologists are starting to appreciate how treacherous and unpredictable sand can be. Today, disposing of the sand is easy, trucks cart it all away. But when the tunnels were dug, sand disposal had to be carried out in secret. One slip up and the entire operation would be exposed. And the sand remains a problem, as the backhoe struggles to shift it. But on the surface above, the archaeologists think they have uncovered proof that the concrete slab they found is "Dick's" trap door. Lifting hooks would have been essential to haul up the trapdoor from its tight fitting slot in the washroom drain. The German guards carried out surprise searches, so the prisoners had to be able to close the tunnel entrance quickly. As the tunnels grew longer, the stakes became higher than ever. The prisoners were increasingly concerned about keeping their operations secret. They had amassed a huge amount of escape equipment, scavenged or stolen from all over the camp. The Germans later drew up an astonishing list of things that had disappeared. 4,000 bed boards, 34 chairs, 52 tables, 90 double-tier bunk beds, and 1,700 blankets to muffle underground sounds. The archaeologists have found an object that could have been made from one of Charles Huppert's cans. These lamps burned mutton fat, skimmed off the greasy soup served up in the camp kitchen. With candles in short supply, it was a brilliant innovation. But the longer the tunnels became, the less oxygen there was at the end. The mutton fat lamps were going out, and the tunnelers were suffocating. So the prisoners devised a way to pump fresh air into the tunnels. Walter Morison helped with the design. It was designed to pump air on both the forwards and backwards strokes, preserving the energy of the pumper.  Several months into the digging, an audacious theft completely changed life underground. Two sharp-eyed prisoners stole some wire from German workmen, and installed lighting in the tunnel, tapping into the camp's electrical supply. Digging around the drain, the archaeologists may have found evidence of this primitive wiring.  The prisoners strung bulbs along the entire length of "Tom," "Dick," and "Harry." Riding through the tunnels had become a spectacular experience. This stamp is a forgery, the first to be recovered from one of the tunnels. It was painstakingly carved from the only available source of rubber. Just as this tantalizing find is uncovered, Davy Jones, Jimmy James and Charles Huppert return to Stalag Luft III, for the first time, to see the tunnel they worked on 60 years ago. After two days of excavating, the backhoes have dug down to 30 feet. The engineers have inserted a steel frame to protect the archaeologists as they work. Although the roof of the tunnel has collapsed, the outline of the decomposed bed boards can still be seen. The archaeologists have also found original Klim tins, which supplied air to the diggers. Amazingly, they are still in place on the floor of the collapsed tunnel. As the tunnels advanced, so did the Allied war effort. The tide was beginning to turn. Up in the skies over Europe, the full might of the United States Air Force was now raining bombs over Hitler's Germany. But the daylight missions proved costly for U.S. bomber squadrons, and thousands of airmen were captured by the Germans. With the Germans on high alert, the prisoners left behind were desperate to finish tunnel "Harry." British flyer Jack Lyon, responsible for tunnel security, received a tip off that the Germans knew the digging had not stopped. By the middle of March, 1944, tunnel "Harry" was finished. The prisoners were raring to go, but had to wait over a week for the first moonless night. At 10
30 p.m., at the top of the vertical shaft, digger Johnny Bull cut through the last inches of soil, and breathed in the fresh air. Finally, after 11 months of hard work, the Great Escape was underway.  Eventually, the air raid ended and the lights went back on. Now the escape could continue. By 2
00 a.m., only 38 prisoners had made it through the tunnel. Number 39 was Jimmy James. But with all the delays, progress was much slower than anticipated. Fewer than a dozen men per hour were making it through the tunnel. At 5
00 a.m., after a mix-up with the rope signal, the 77th man emerging from the tunnel was spotted by a guard. Ken Rees, who was next in line to escape, heard it all from the bottom of the exit shaft. Ken Rees was the last man to make it back, the last man in tunnel "Harry." Back in the hut, the men were frantically hiding the evidence. The guards were on their way, and no one wanted to be caught with fake passes and other contraband.  Everyone caught was put in solitary confinement, including Ken Rees. Wearing civilian clothing, many of the 76 men who had made it out were on their way to local railway stations, hoping to catch trains across Europe. Each escape party was led by a fluent German speaker, who would do all the talking if they needed to buy tickets or show their identity cards. Remarkably, no one recognized Jimmy's party as escaped prisoners, and they were able to buy 12 train tickets. In short order, they were en route for Czechoslovakia.  But the escaped prisoners, traveling by train, were already long gone, fanning out across German territory. Against incredible odds, Jimmy managed to tunnel out of the concentration camp. He was recaptured after 14 days on the run and remained a prisoner until the end of the war.  The Great Escape had incensed Hitler, who insisted all the recaptured prisoners be executed to set an example. His generals persuaded him to reduce the number to 50. After the war, most of the Gestapo agents responsible for these murders were hunted down to face war crimes tribunals. The Luftwaffe colonel at Stalag Luft III was so appalled by the action of the Gestapo that he allowed the prisoners to build a memorial to the 50 outside the camp. From the memorial, the veterans return to get one final look at the tunnel. Even with the support frame, it has become too dangerous to dig on any further. The archaeologists decide to call off the excavation and refill the hole. For archaeologists and veterans alike, this dig has reminded everyone of the incredible achievement of the Great Escape. Sixty years after the most famous escape in history, the remains of the last tunnel would be buried forever. The great Judean Desert
 south of Jerusalem and west of the Dead Sea; the land of the ancient prophets of the Hebrew Bible; the land of King David and King Solomon; the land of Jesus and the early Christians. Here, high above a deep, forbidding canyon, is a mysterious cave known as the "Cave of Letters." Richard Freund, a professor of Jewish history, is mounting a new expedition to the Cave of Letters, determined to unravel its deep secrets. Freund's busload of archaeologists and historians is in for an arduous journey, a journey that will force them to confront long-held beliefs about Biblical history.  The trek begins on top of the cliff, then down a steep path to the level of the cave. It continues across a sheer cliff-face on a series of narrow ledges, and finally up to the cave itself. The path wanders precariously, 650 feet above the canyon floor. One last challenge
 a 50-foot climb up to the cave's entrance. Soon the real quest can begin. Schiffman, Freund and their colleagues will be able to explore a place that's intrigued historians and biblical scholars for decades, a place that may reveal secrets that have been held for thousands of years. Ancient Refuge in the Holy Land, right now on NOVA. The vast desert of southern Israel is one of the harshest wastelands in the world. For thousands of years, this arid land has witnessed epic struggles, warrior heroes, religious visionaries, and tragic victims of persecution. It was an Israeli expedition in 1960 that made the Cave of Letters famous. The expedition was led by one of the founding fathers of the young state of Israel, a military general, statesman and archaeologist named Yigael Yadin. Along with dozens of archeologists and hundreds of volunteers, Yadin launched an urgent search of the Dead Sea caves to rescue artifacts of historical importance before Israel's rich ancient heritage was looted by treasure hunters. Bar Kokhba led a heroic rebellion against the Romans about nineteen hundred years ago. Over the centuries, he has been lionized in Jewish stories and poems as the last ruler of a free Jewish nation. Some even considered him the Messiah, born of a star to free his people from Roman oppression, but no historical evidence of his life had ever been found before.  The Cave of Letters is massive, with two openings in the sheer cliff wall. Inside there are three chambers connected by narrow passageways. Overall, the cavern complex cuts more than 300 yards deep into the cliff-side. In the early 1960s, Yadin's team scoured the cave perimeter but was unable to search beneath the layer of rubble up to 15 feet deep that litters the cave floor, rocks and boulders knocked loose from the roof by earthquakes over the centuries. But Freund's team has ways of seeing beneath the rubble. Ground-penetrating radar, GPR, can locate underground features using radio waves. The radar pinpoints the most likely spots to dig for artifacts. Identifying likely places to dig is one thing, but actually seeing under the ground requires another new tool, a device Richard Freund chanced upon back in the U.S. Freund invited Gordon Moshman, a physician who uses endoscopes to come and operate it inside the cave. A lot is riding on this device, a tiny camera lens at the end of a long, flexible, optic fiber. Instead of the human body, he's probing history. And it's tedious, dirty work. New evidence that people once lived in this wretched place is turning up daily. A simple wooden comb yields an important insight. Why would anyone have brought children here? How long would they have been forced to live in such miserable conditions? The life of one ancient woman in particular captivates Hannah Cotton. Her name was Babatha. A widow and mother in her thirties when the rebellion began, she was related to Yehonatan, the military commander mentioned in Bar Kokhba's documents. It seems she fled with him to the Cave of Letters. Babatha's purse contained documents written in Aramaic and Greek, the official languages of the day, wedding contracts, property deeds, bills of sale and more. Because women had only limited rights under either Jewish or Roman law, Babatha guarded her documents carefully. Babatha probably lived a comfortable life before the Bar Kokhba uprising. Her papers show that she owned a date orchard in the prosperous town of En Geddi on the Western shore of the Dead Sea. The Cave of Letters was so desolate and inaccessible, Babatha and the others must have felt confident they could stay here, undetected, for as long as necessary, then return home with their possessions once the Romans were defeated by Bar Kokhba's rebels. About 20 years before the birth of Jesus, Herod, the King of the Jews, appointed by Rome, began expanding the 500-year-old temple on Jerusalem's Temple Mount. But Rome came to see the temple as a threat to its sovereignty, the center of growing Jewish nationalism. The emperor imposed oppressive restrictions on its use, and Roman soldiers breached the sanctuary, defiling it in Jewish eyes. All that remains, today, of the temple complex in Jerusalem, is a part of its massive outer wall now known as the "Western Wall" or the "Wailing Wall." Jews still consider it their holiest place. For Bar Kokhba, this was the last straw. He raised a rebel army of skilled Jewish fighters and caught the Roman legions by surprise. For nearly three years, the rebels held the upper hand and re-established Israel as an independent, Jewish nation with Bar Kokhba as its leader. Bar Kokhba made his coins by overstamping the Roman emperor's coinage with temple imagery and the inscription "For the freedom of Jerusalem." Bar Kokhba wrote several threatening letters to Yehonatan, the leader from En Geddi whom Babatha and the others followed into the Cave. Babatha's documents, for instance, reveal no signs of tension between Jews and their Roman overlords. The shockwave might have been Bar Kokhba's rebellion itself. Opinions differ as to how many people joined Bar Kokhba, or how popular he was within Judea, but most historians do agree on one thing
 the Roman response was massive and brutal. Hadrian's wrath knew no bounds. Jews who survived the slaughter were forbidden to enter their holy city, Jerusalem. He even sought to erase the Jewish people from world memory, changing the name of their country from Judea to Syria Palestina. The bones are small, all women and children. Freund's team of experts may now be able to answer an important question that haunted Yadin
 what was the exact cause of death for these refugees? The lack of physical trauma suggests that these people did not die violently. It seems they may have slowly starved to death after the Roman legions cut off their supplies. But how did desperate refugees, chased from their homes by Roman Legions, find the time to gather so many supplies? How did they know where to go? Richard Freund has a radical theory
 long before the Bar Kokhba rebellion, Jews would also have been in need of a refuge, when the Romans crushed the First Jewish Revolt and burned the temple to the ground in the year 70. Freund believes that the Cave of Letters was occupied during that first revolt, decades before Bar Kokhba, a possibility that Yadin's team never really considered.  Freund is convinced that there must be a lower layer in the cave, dating back to the temple era. He turns to another new technology that might confirm this, Electrical Resistivity Tomography. One of the original members of Yadin's 1960 expedition, Pinhas Porat, remembers vividly how the bronzes were found. When Porat and his colleagues began to dig, they made an unpleasant discovery. All the other finds in the Cave of Letters were of Jewish origin, but Yadin believed these bronzes were pagan ritual items, Roman, that had been stolen by the Bar Kokhba rebels. But Richard Freund disagrees. As the dig winds down, the team makes one last search with a metal detector
 another coin, but this one is different. This coin convinces Freund that the cave was indeed occupied in the year 70, following the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem. And that the 19 bronzes are not Roman at all. He believes they are Jewish ritual objects rescued from the temple just before it was destroyed and hidden away in the Cave of Letters. It's long been believed that everything from the great temple was destroyed or carted away by Roman soldiers as depicted on the arch of Titus, the triumphant structure erected by the Emperor to celebrate Rome's victory over the Jews. But some scholars believe that Jewish priests were able to hide precious ritual objects before the catastrophe. They point to a cryptic first century text known as the "Copper Scroll" to support their theory. It's the most unusual and puzzling of all the Dead Sea Scrolls. This scroll of copper was hidden in a cave like this near the Dead Sea village of Qumran, where it lay undiscovered for nearly 2000 years. The copper was coated with clay and could not be unrolled. Only by carefully slicing the scroll into thin strips could the ancient writing be deciphered. Yadin's expedition had found the bronze artifacts near this northern entrance. Now Freund wants to measure how deep the bronzes were buried. Is it the same depth as described in the Copper Scroll? It seems too good to be true
 the bronzes were found at nearly the depth described in the Copper Scroll. The text also mentions a stone jar buried by the metal objects. Yadin found two stoneware vessels near the bronze ritual items. He also found a small piece of parchment with a verse from the Bible's Book of Psalms, written in a style of script common to many first century documents
 Freund's theory has controversial implications. If he's right, it would mean that some items from the Jew's holy temple were decorated with images from pagan mythology. In fact, the goddess Thetis appears on the base of the Jewish menorah carved on the Arch of Titus, along with several other Roman mythic icons. Did the Jews appropriate pagan imagery? Certainly some did. King Herod himself modeled many of his buildings after Greco-Roman structures. But many of Richard Freund's colleagues think he's gone too far. Freund must gather more evidence to support his claim. He thinks he may have found something here in the ancient ruins of a place called Bethsaida. The best way to know if this incense shovel matches the one found by Yadin is to examine them side by side, so Freund heads to Jerusalem. The 19 bronze items from the Cave of Letters were on display here at the Israel Museum's Shrine of the Book. The curator, Adolpho Roitman, carefully lifts out the incense shovel that was discovered by Yadin, so Freund can compare it to the one from Bethsaida. Some scholars are intrigued by Freund's ideas. But others are not convinced that the Cave of Letters incense shovel came from the temple and not from an ordinary household. The dig is done for now. But the debate over what has been learned is just beginning. Freund's theory that the cave was used as a refuge after the destruction of the temple in the first century, as well as later during the Bar Kokhba revolt, is based on many small pieces of evidence, and his colleagues aren't buying it. Convincing evidence could come from the bronzes themselves, if their age can be determined using the latest carbon dating techniques. The metal itself can't be dated, but the rope can. The test measures the amount of radioactive carbon present in the sample, an amount that decays steadily over time at a known rate. The technique cannot pinpoint a precise year, but it gives a probable range of dates for the material. The rope comes from sometime between the years 70 and 260—hardly conclusive results. It could be, as Freund believes, from the time of the First Revolt when the temple was destroyed, but it could also be from Bar Kokhba's time. Freund is not discouraged. As he presents his findings at a conference at New York University, he has one more card to play, a well-accepted test by an Israeli archeologist to narrow the range. Using three letters from Bar Kokhba, archeologist Magen Broshi compared the actual dates appearing on the letters to the results of the carbon-14 analysis. In each case, the actual date of the letters corresponded almost exactly with the older date in the carbon-14 range. Freund is still having trouble convincing a majority of his peers, but that's to be expected, especially in Biblical archeology where science meets politics meets religion.