Good evening.

This is the 37th time I have spoken to you from this office, where so many decisions have been made that shaped the history of this Nation. Each time I have done so to discuss with you some matter that I believe affected the national interest.

In all the decisions I have made in my public life, I have always tried to do what was best for the Nation. Throughout the long and difficult period of Watergate, I have felt it was my duty to persevere, to make every possible effort to complete the term of office to which you elected me.

In the past few days, however, it has become evident to me that I no longer have a strong enough political base in the Congress to justify continuing that effort. As long as there was such a base, I felt strongly that it was necessary to see the constitutional process through to its conclusion, that to do otherwise would be unfaithful to the spirit of that deliberately difficult process and a dangerously destabilizing precedent for the future.

But with the disappearance of that base, I now believe that the constitutional purpose has been served, and there is no longer a need for the process to be prolonged.

I would have preferred to carry through to the finish whatever the personal agony it would have involved, and my family unanimously urged me to do so. But the interest of the Nation must always come before any personal considerations.

From the discussions I have had with Congressional and other leaders, I have concluded that because of the Watergate matter I might not have the support of the Congress that I would consider necessary to back the very difficult decisions and carry out the duties of this office in the way the interests of the Nation would require.

I have never been a quitter. To leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent to every instinct in my body. But as President, I must put the interest of America first. America needs a full-time President and a full-time Congress, particularly at this time with problems we face at home and abroad.

To continue to fight through the months ahead for my personal vindication would almost totally absorb the time and attention of both the President and the Congress in a period when our entire focus should be on the great issues of peace abroad and prosperity without inflation at home.

Therefore, I shall resign the Presidency effective at noon tomorrow. Vice President Ford will be sworn in as President at that hour in this office.

As I recall the high hopes for America with which we began this second term, I feel a great sadness that I will not be here in this office working on your behalf to achieve those hopes in the next 21/2 years. But in turning over direction of the Government to Vice President Ford, I know, as I told the Nation when I nominated him for that office 10 months ago, that the leadership of America will be in good hands.

In passing this office to the Vice President, I also do so with the profound sense of the weight of responsibility that will fall on his shoulders tomorrow and, therefore, of the understanding, the patience, the cooperation he will need from all Americans.

As he assumes that responsibility, he will deserve the help and the support of all of us. As we look to the future, the first essential is to begin healing the wounds of this Nation, to put the bitterness and divisions of the recent past behind us, and to rediscover those shared ideals that lie at the heart of our strength and unity as a great and as a free people.

By taking this action, I hope that I will have hastened the start of that process of healing which is so desperately needed in America.

I regret deeply any injuries that may have been done in the course of the events that led to this decision. I would say only that if some of my Judgments were wrong, and some were wrong, they were made in what I believed at the time to be the best interest of the Nation.

To those who have stood with me during these past difficult months, to my family, my friends, to many others who joined in supporting my cause because they believed it was right, I will be eternally grateful for your support.

And to those who have not felt able to give me your support, let me say I leave with no bitterness toward those who have opposed me, because all of us, in the final analysis, have been concerned with the good of the country, however our judgments might differ.

So, let us all now join together in affirming that common commitment and in helping our new President succeed for the benefit of all Americans.

I shall leave this office with regret at not completing my term, but with gratitude for the privilege of serving as your President for the past 51/2 years. These years have been a momentous time in the history of our Nation and the world. They have been a time of achievement in which we can all be proud, achievements that represent the shared efforts of the Administration, the Congress, and the people.

But the challenges ahead are equally great, and they, too, will require the support and the efforts of the Congress and the people working in cooperation with the new Administration.

We have ended America's longest war, but in the work of securing a lasting peace in the world, the goals ahead are even more far-reaching and more difficult. We must complete a structure of peace so that it will be said of this generation, our generation of Americans, by the people of all nations, not only that we ended one war but that we prevented future wars.

We have unlocked the doors that for a quarter of a century stood between the United States and the People's Republic of China.

We must now ensure that the one quarter of the world's people who live in the People's Republic of China will be and remain not our enemies but our friends.

In the Middle East, 100 million people in the Arab countries, many of whom have considered us their enemy for nearly 20 years, now look on us as their friends. We must continue to build on that friendship so that peace can settle at last over the Middle East and so that the cradle of civilization will not become its grave.

Together with the Soviet Union we have made the crucial breakthroughs that have begun the process of limiting nuclear arms. But we must set as our goal not just limiting but reducing and finally destroying these terrible weapons so that they cannot destroy civilization and so that the threat of nuclear war will no longer hang over the world and the people.

We have opened the new relation with the Soviet Union. We must continue to develop and expand that new relationship so that the two strongest nations of the world will live together in cooperation rather than confrontation.

Around the world, in Asia, in Africa, in Latin America, in the Middle East, there are millions of people who live in terrible poverty, even starvation. We must keep as our goal turning away from production for war and expanding production for peace so that people everywhere on this earth can at last look forward in their children's time, if not in our own time, to having the necessities for a decent life.

Here in America, we are fortunate that most of our people have not only the blessings of liberty but also the means to live full and good and, by the world's standards, even abundant lives. We must press on, however, toward a goal of not only more and better jobs but of full opportunity for every American and of what we are striving so hard right now to achieve, prosperity without inflation.

For more than a quarter of a century in public life I have shared in the turbulent history of this era. I have fought for what I believed in. I have tried to the best of my ability to discharge those duties and meet those responsibilities that were entrusted to me.

Sometimes I have succeeded and sometimes I have failed, but always I have taken heart from what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena, "whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly."

I pledge to you tonight that as long as I have a breath of life in my body, I shall continue in that spirit. I shall continue to work for the great causes to which I have been dedicated throughout my years as a Congressman, a Senator, a Vice President, and President, the cause of peace not just for America but among all nations, prosperity, justice, and opportunity for all of our people.

There is one cause above all to which I have been devoted and to which I shall always be devoted for as long as I live.

When I first took the oath of office as President 51/2 years ago, I made this sacred commitment, to "consecrate my office, my energies, and all the wisdom I can summon to the cause of peace among nations."

I have done my very best in all the days since to be true to that pledge. As a result of these efforts, I am confident that the world is a safer place today, not only for the people of America but for the people of all nations, and that all of our children have a better chance than before of living in peace rather than dying in war.

This, more than anything, is what I hoped to achieve when I sought the Presidency. This, more than anything, is what I hope will be my legacy to you, to our country, as I leave the Presidency.

To have served in this office is to have felt a very personal sense of kinship with each and every American. In leaving it, I do so with this prayer:	May God's grace be with you in all the days ahead.

My motivation in making this decision comes from love. I love MU, Columbia, where I grew up, and the state of Missouri. I have thought greatly about this decision, and it's the right thing to do. The response to this announcement I'm sure will bring joy to some and anger to others, and that's why we're here today. So let me speak to why this is so important at this time.

"To our students: from Concerned Student 1950 to our grad students, football players and other students, the frustration and anger that I see is clear, real,and I don't doubt it for a second.

"To the faculty and staff who have expressed their anger, their frustration, this, too, is real.

"To my friends and my supporters that have been so gracious and have sent so many emails in the past and calls with support, I understand that you might be frustrated, as well.

"So the question really is, is why did we get to this very difficult situation. It is my belief we stopped listening to each other. We didn't respond or react. We got frustrated with each other, and we forced individuals like Jonathan Butler to take immediate action and unusual steps to effect change.

"This is not, I repeat not, the way change should come about. Change comes from listening, learning, caring and conversation. We have to respect each other enough to stop yelling at each other and start listening, and quit intimidating each other. ...

"Unfortunately this has not happened. And I just want to stand before you today, and I take full responsibility for this frustration, and I take full responsibility for the inaction that has occurred."

“I ask everybody — from students to faculty to staff to my friends, everybody — use my resignation to heal and to start talking again. To make the changes necessary, and let's focus on changing what we can change today and in the future, and not what we can’t change, which is what happened in the past.

“I truly love everybody here and the very institution, and my decision to resign comes out of love, not hate. I’d like to read some Scripture that’s given me strength. I hope it provides you with some strength as well, as we think about this next. I have to also to give credit to my daughter, who reminded me of the Scripture.

"Psalm 46 verse 1: ‘The Lord is my refuge and my strength, my very present help in trouble.’”

"We need to use my resignation — please, please — use this resignation to heal, not to hate as we move forward today for a brighter tomorrow. God bless all of you, and thank you for this wonderful opportunity to" serve "the University of Missouri system. Thank you."

Just a few days ago I marked the anniversary of my eighth year as Prime Minister and my tenth as leader of the National Party.

Such an occasion seems a fitting time to not only take stock of the past 10 years, but to look forward.

Being leader of both the party and the country has been an incredible experience.

Along with my Cabinet and caucus colleagues, we steered the country through the global financial crisis which was arguably the worst recession since the Great Depression.

We have stood with Christchurch in the wake of the earthquakes - the greatest natural disaster to hit our country since 1931, and we have mourned the victims of the Pike River Mine disaster; one of the saddest days our small nation has endured in recent times.

During my time as Prime Minister the Government has positioned New Zealand so that our economy could harness the opportunities offered by a burgeoning Asia and a more connected world.

Reforms have been far reaching, including substantial changes to our tax, welfare, planning and labour laws, not to mention the successful partial sell-down of state companies, the considerable overhaul of our Justice, Security and Corrections agencies and, of course, trade liberalisation.

Ten years since I first became leader of the National Party, I believe we can look back on advanced race relations and real momentum in the Treaty settlement programme.

We also have a more confident, outward-looking and multi-cultural New Zealand that competes and succeeds on the world stage.

Throughout these years I have given everything I could to this job that I cherish, and this country that I love. All of this has come at quite some sacrifice for the people who are dearest to me - my family.

For my wife Bronagh, there have been many nights and weekends spent alone, many occasions that were important to her that I simply could not attend.

My daughter Stephie and my son Max have transitioned from teenagers to young adults while coping with an extraordinary level of intrusion and pressure because of their father's job.

I thank them for their tolerance. Bronagh and I are immensely proud of them. 

My family has also had remarkable opportunities and experiences as we have met people and visited places from one end of our country to the other.

We have celebrated alongside fellow Kiwis in their happiest times, and wept with them in their saddest.

Simply put, it has, for me, been the most remarkable, satisfying and exciting time of my life. 

But despite the amazing career I have had in politics, I have never seen myself as a career politician. I have certainly never wanted my success in politics to be measured by how long I spent in Parliament.

The National Party is in great shape. Bill English has told me that in all his years here, ours is the most cohesive Cabinet he has seen. And I personally am humbled and gratified that after eight years as Prime Minister, my personal support from the public remains high.

I absolutely believe we can win the next election.

But I do not believe that, if you asked me if I was committed to serving out a fourth term, that I could look the public in the eye and say yes.

And more than anything else in my time here, I have tried to be straight and true with New Zealanders.

I also believe that leadership change, for the right reasons and handled well, is good for a political party.

For all these reasons, I today told my Cabinet and caucus colleagues of my decision to step down as Leader of the National Party and as Prime Minister.

It is my expectation that on Monday 12 December National MPs will hold a special caucus meeting to select a new leader and later that day I will tender my resignation to the Governor-General.

This has been the hardest decision I have ever made and I do not know what I will do next.

But for me this feels the right time to go.

It gives the Cabinet and caucus plenty of time to settle in with a new leader before heading into the next election with a proud record of strong economic management, a commitment to the most vulnerable in our society and lots of ideas to keep lifting New Zealanders up in the world. 

It would be easy to say I have made this decision solely to rediscover the personal and family life I once had, and that is a factor, but it is one among many.

Over the years I have observed many leaders who, in a similar position, fail to take this step.

I can understand why. It is a hard job to leave.

But, for me and the National Party, this is a good time to go. Party membership is high and the party is well-funded. The caucus is talented and eager to serve, and one of the achievements of which I am proud is having built with my colleagues a Cabinet team that is capable, committed and cohesive.

That is a great legacy for National's next leader.

Just as I grasped the challenge of leadership so will a new leader.

Inevitably they will bring their own personality, emphasis and priorities to the role. 

This is part of the process that allows a long-serving government to keep delivering.

For my part I am confident the caucus has a number of individuals who would make a fine future PM.

It is inevitable I will be asked who I will vote for at the caucus meeting on December 12.

Whoever the caucus elects will have my unwavering support, but if Bill English puts his name forward then I will vote for him.

For 10 years now Bill and I have worked as a team. I have witnessed first-hand his leadership style, his capacity for work, his grasp of the economy, his commitment to change and, most of all, his decency as a husband, as a father, as a friend, a colleague and as a politician.

Bill has, I believe, grown a great deal since he was last Party leader.

Fifteen years on he has more experience and the party and political cycles are quite different.

I believe that National, under Bill's leadership, would win the election in 2017.

This is not the time to thank all of those who have made the past 10 years possible for me.

But nor can I stand here without acknowledging Bronagh, Stephie and Max who have sacrificed a lot for me to have been able to do what the job demands.

No person in this role can succeed without the support of an enormous number of talented and dedicated individuals.

I thank my deputy Bill English, the Cabinet and caucus for their loyalty and energy and, of course, my wonderful staff, so well led by Wayne Eagleson, who have done more than I ever could have hoped or expected.

I also wish to thank and acknowledge our support partners ACT, United Future and the Maori Party without whom the strong and stable Government we have delivered would not have been possible.

I have no doubt my successor will look to build upon these relationships.

Last but not least, I wish to put on record my everlasting gratitude to the people of Helensville for electing me, and to the New Zealand public for their support, faith and encouragement. It has been my privilege to serve you all.

I have always believed that the test of a good Prime Minister is that he or she leaves the country in better shape than they found it. Over time, others will judge whether I have done that. 

All I can say is that I gave it everything I had.

I have left nothing in the tank.

Finally, while I intend to stay in Parliament long enough to avoid the cost and inconvenience a by-election would cause the good people of Helensville, I will at an appropriate time prior to the next election step down as an MP.

On that day, I shall walk from these buildings for the last time, a richer person for the experience and privilege of being here, and hoping and believing that New Zealand has been well served by the Government I led.

Thank you.

I am aware that not everybody in this country is happy, indeed, a lot of young people have been wound up by scare stories and are actually very angry, and very scared about their future.

It’s an irony, really, that it’s the youth of the country that appear to be worried. Right across the European Union, it’s the under 30s that are protesting in the streets against undemocratic centralised control and , indeed, against the Euro and pretty much anything that emanates from Brussels . 

In time, I hope that some of these sharp divisions can be healed when people come to realise that, actually, life outside the European Union is really very exciting and we’ve got a much better, brighter future being in charge of our own lives. Certainly the stock markets, despite everything George Osborne told us, have rallied very strongly. FTSE is now about 14 per cent higher than it was during its February lows. 


It is a delight to see the number of Commonwealth countries rushing forward in a bidding war to be the first people to sign a trade agreement with an independent UK. What the country needs is strong leadership, what it needs is direction, what it needs is not business as usual. I am certain of one thing, the UK will leave the European Union, we have won that, and in terms of our Parliament, our courts, that is a great historic victory. What I am less certain of, is what deal is this government going to cut? 

We need a new Prime Minister that puts down some pretty clear red lines, that we’re not going to give in on issues like free movement, and a Prime Minister who is not going to sell us out to what is known as the single market, but what is effectively a big business protectionist cartel. So we need a vision from our new leader, a vision that shows that we are going to engage with the world, that turns us into an enterprise economy. 

To do that, to achieve that, we need a team of negotiators that includes figures from across the political spectrum which reflects that Brexit vote , and crucially, we need some business people, who know not only how the world works, but understand the importance of lobbying industry directly. We need to be lobbying the German car industry and the French wine producers, because next year both France and Germany have General Elections. 


It is pressure on Merkel, it is pressure on Hollande from within those countries that is likely to get us the best possible deal. And we need to go global, there is no reason to wait for this, at all. As soon as we get a new Prime Minister, we need teams of negotiators. I’m told that we haven’t got the skill! I’m told that we haven’t got the competence or the expertise within our own civil service, which I suppose is the price you pay when you give away the ability to run your own country. So, let’s headhunt them. Let’s get them in from Singapore, or South Korea, or Chile, or Switzerland, or any of these countries who’ve managed to achieve far more in terms of global trade deals than we have as part of the European Union. 

So we are now in charge of our own future, and I want us to grab this opportunity with both hands. Now, one of the questions that is being asked is: what of UKIP? What is the future of UKIP after this result? Well, we have clearly established ourselves as the third political force in this country, and this year we’ve extended our elected representation to the Welsh Assembly and the London Assembly. There is not doubt that without us, without the growth in UKIP, there would not have been a referendum. There is also no doubt, that when it came to the ground campaign in this referendum, it was the people’s army of UKIP who were out there delivering the leaflets, putting out the posters and doing all that work that needed, desperately, to be done. I do believe myself that it was UKIP, and UKIP’s messages, that inspired non-voters to go out there and make the difference. Without UKIP< there is no way that the Leave vote would ever have got over the line. 

So UKIP needs to be strong. We need to be strong, and push, and try and make sure that this country gets the best possible terms. And in electoral terms, the party now has built up a very loyal following of people, who want to go out and vote UKIP at every given opportunity. And they see us, our voters, they see us as being the one party that’s actually prepared to stand up for ordinary, decent people. I feel that the deeper the crisis in the Labour Party becomes, and there’s certainly no signs of that going away, and the further that the PLP and the leadership get away from their own voters, I feel that’s perhaps where our greatest potential lies. UKIP right now is in a very sound financial position, 

I do believe we need some reform of its management structures. There is further professionalism that needs to be done, but the party is in a pretty good place, certainly compared to all of the others. If we do not get, if we do not get, a satisfactory Brexit deal – that allied to the woes of the Labour Party, to the groundswell of support that is there amongst UKIP loyalists – if we don’t get a good Brexit deal, then in 2020, watch this space. 

The other subject of speculation has been ‘what am I going to do’? All I can say is, on this long journey, is a great thanks to anybody who has helped me on this journey, a great number of whom are in this room right now. It has been a very long journey. Not at every stage of the way an easy one, although it has been tremendous fun. When I think back to when I first stood for UKIP, in fact when I first stood for anybody, in the Eastleigh by-election which took place in 1994, and I managed to scrape past screaming Lord Such, by a massive 164 votes, and to have gone from that to being part of a national campaign that attracted 17.5 million votes for Brexit says to me that, tough though it has been at times, it has certainly all been worth it. I came into politics from business because I believed that this nation should be self- governing.

 I have never been, and I have never wanted to be a career politician., my aim in being in politics was to get Britain out of the European Union. That is what we voted for in that referendum two weeks ago, and that is why I now feel that I have done my bit, that I couldn’t possibly achieve more than we managed to get in that referendum, and so I feel that it is right that I should now stand aside as leader of UKIP. 

I will continue to support the party, I will support the new leader, I will watch the renegotiation process in Brussels like a hawk, and perhaps comment in the European Parliament from time to time. I am also very keen to help the independence movements that are springing up in other parts of the European Union because I am certain of one thing, you haven’t seen the last country that wants to leave the EU. It has been a huge chunk of my life, doing this, and it is not easy, perhaps, when you feel a degree of ownership of something to let it go. But it does come, as I say, at a cost, it has come at a cost to me and perhaps to those around me. During the referendum campaign I said I want my country back’, what I’m saying today is ‘I want my life back’, and it begins right now. 

Thank you.

Good morning everyone. The country has just taken part in a giant democratic exercise, perhaps the biggest in our history. Over 33 million people from England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Gibraltar have all had their say. We should be proud of the fact that, in these islands, we trust the people with these big decisions.

We not only have a parliamentary democracy, but on questions about the arrangements for how we’re governed, there are times when it is right to ask the people themselves, and that is what we have done. The British people have voted to leave the European Union, and their will must be respected.
I want to thank everyone who took part in the campaign on my side of the argument, including all those who put aside party differences to speak in what they believed was the national interest. And let me congratulate all those who took part in the Leave campaign, for the spirited and passionate case that they made.

The will of the British people is an instruction that must be delivered. It was not a decision that was taken lightly, not least because so many things were said by so many different organisations about the significance of this decision. So there can be no doubt about the result.

Across the world, people have been watching a choice that Britain has made. I would reassure those markets and investors that Britain’s economy is fundamentally strong, and I would also reassure Brits living in European countries, and European citizens living here, that there will be no immediate changes in your circumstances. There will be no initial change in the way our people can travel, in the way our goods can move, or the way our services can be sold.

We must now prepare for a negotiation with the European Union. This will need to involve the full engagement of the Scottish, Welsh, and Northern Ireland governments to ensure that the interests of all parts of our United Kingdom are protected and advanced. But above all, this will require strong, determined and committed leadership.

I’m very proud and very honoured to have been Prime Minister of this country for six years. I believe we have made great steps, with more people in work than ever before in our history, with reforms to welfare and education, increasing people’s life chances, building a bigger and stronger society, keeping our promises to the poorest people in the world, and enabling those who love each other to get married, whatever their sexuality. But above all, restoring Britain’s economic strength. And I’m grateful to everyone who’s helped to make that happen.

I’ve also always believed that we have to confront big decisions, not duck them. That is why we delivered the first Coalition government in 70 years, to bring our economy back from the brink. It’s why we delivered a fair, legal and decisive referendum in Scotland. And it’s why I made the pledge to renegotiate Britain’s position in the European Union, and to hold a referendum on our membership, and have carried those things out.
I’ve fought this campaign in the only way I know how – which is to say directly and passionately what I think and feel, head, heart and soul. I held nothing back. I was absolutely clear about my belief that Britain is stronger, safer and better off inside the European Union. And I made clear the referendum was about this and this alone, not the future of any single politician, including myself. But the British people have made a very clear decision to take a different path, and as such, I think the country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction.

I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination. This is not a decision I’ve taken lightly. But I do believe it’s in the national interest to have a period of stability, and then the new leadership required.

There is no need for a precise timetable today, but in my view we should aim to have a new prime minister in place by the start of the Conservative Party conference in October. Delivering stability will be important, and I will continue in the post as Prime Minister with my Cabinet for the next three months. The Cabinet will meet on Monday. The Governor of the Bank of England is making a statement about the steps that the bank and the Treasury are taking to reassure financial markets.

We will also continue taking forward the important legislation that we set before Parliament in the Queen’s speech. And I’ve spoken to Her Majesty the Queen this morning and advised her of the steps that I am taking. A negotiation with the European Union will need to begin under a new Prime Minister, and I think it’s right that this new Prime Minister takes the decision about when to trigger Article 50 and start the formal and legal process of leaving the EU.

I will attend the European Council next week to explain the decision the British people have taken, and my own decision. The British people have made a choice. That not only needs to be respected, but those on the losing side of the argument – myself included – should help to make it work.
Britain is a special country. We have so many great advantages. A parliamentary democracy where we resolve great issues about our future through peaceful debate. A great trading nation with our science and arts, our engineering and our creativity respected the world over. And while we are not perfect, I do believe we can be a model of a multiracial, multifaith democracy where people can come and make a contribution and rise to the very highest that their talent allows.

Although leaving Europe was not the path I recommended, I am the first to praise our incredible strengths. I’ve said before that Britain can survive outside the European Union, and indeed that we could find a way. Now, the decision has been made to leave, we need to find the best way. And I will do everything I can to help. I love this country, and I feel honoured to have served it, and I will do everything I can in future to help this great country succeed.

Thank you very much.

Ladies and gentlemen, it is with great sadness that I announce that I will resign as Australia's Minister for Foreign Affairs.

I am sad because I love this job.

I'm totally dedicated to the work that we are doing in Australia's name around the world, and I believe that we have achieved many good results for Australia, and I'm proud of them.

It's therefore been for me a great privilege to serve our country as foreign minister, to represent our people abroad, and I thank the people of our country for their support as I have discharged these responsibilities.

But while I am sad to leave this office, I am sadder still that it has come to this.

The last time that I resigned from a position in public office was when I resigned as prime minister of Australia, and regrettably, there have been some similar factors at play today.

It's time for some plain speaking on this.

The truth is I can only serve as foreign minister if I have the confidence of Prime Minister Gillard and her senior ministers.

In recent days, Minister Crean and a number of other faceless men have publicly attacked my integrity and therefore my fitness to serve as a minister in the government.

When challenged today on these attacks, Prime Minister Gillard chose not to repudiate them.

I can only reluctantly conclude that she therefore shares these views.

The simple truth is that I cannot continue to serve as Foreign Minister if I do not have Prime Minister Gillard's support.

I therefore believe the only honourable thing and the only honourable course of action is for me to resign, and I do so with a genuinely heavy heart and after much personal reflection.

There are other factors, too, that I have had to take into consideration today.

The truth is that the Australian people regard this whole affair as little better than a soap opera, and they are right.
And under current circumstances, I won't be part of it.

It is also, I believe, a distraction from the real business of government.

I also believe it's affecting the business community, and I agree with recent statements by peak bodies to this effect. It is important that business confidence is maintained in Australia.

The economy and jobs are core to what any responsible government is about.

I also believe that this ongoing saga is bad for my good friend Anna Bligh, as she fights the fight of her life in Queensland.

She's a great Premier. She's a good friend.

And I believe the good people of Queensland deserve some clear space over the coming month, as they make up their minds on a very important decision on the future of Queensland - my home state; a state I'm very proud to be from.

The truth is I also feel very uncomfortable doing this from Washington and not in Australia, but I don't feel as if I have a choice, given the responsibilities I have before me over the days ahead, here in Washington, in London on the future of Somalia and piracy in the Indian Ocean, and in Tunisia on the future of Syria.

These are important challenges for the world, where a responsible Australian voice needs to be heard, a voice which I have sought to inject in my period as Foreign Minister on these core challenges, and under no circumstances do I want Australia's international reputation brought into disrepute because of this ongoing saga.

Therefore Ambassador Beazley will discharge my functions here on my behalf in Washington, tomorrow, and the permanent Secretary of my department, Dennis Richardson, will represent me in London and in Tunisia.

I will return home to Brisbane tomorrow, arriving back there on Friday morning.

Over the days ahead I will be consulting openly and honestly with my family, with my community and my parliamentary colleagues, taking their counsel on what I should do next, and what my next step should be.

I will then make a full statement to the Australian people on my future, before Parliament resumes next Monday.

I deeply believe that if the Australian Labor Party, a party of which I have been a proud member for more than 30 years, is to have the best future for our nation, then it must change fundamentally its culture and to end the power 
of faceless men.

Australia must be governed by the people, not by the factions.

But I can promise you this, there is no way - no way - that I will ever be party to a stealth attack on a sitting prime minister elected by the people.

We all know that what happened then was wrong, and it must never happen again.

I would like to thank very much, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Their Secretary, Dennis Richardson, Australia's former ambassador here in Washington, is a first class Australian diplomat and through him I would thank the department's executive and all the deputy secretaries I've worked with day after day, week after week, in advancing Australia's interests around the world.

These are good people, and all the Ambassadors and High Commissioners, who proudly stand there every day, in Australia's name, are doing good things for our interests and expressing our values right across the world, and I publicly acknowledge them with heartfelt thanks.

I would also like to thank my exceptionally loyal and hardworking staff, led by my chief of staff, Philip Green, and his deputy, Kate Sieper.

These are a great team, phenomenally loyal and hardworking, and together we have done good things.

In my letter of resignation to the Prime Minister, I have asked her to give effect to my resignation 48 hours after my return to Australia, so that I can affect the best transition for my staff as possible under these circumstances.

I'd think you would understand, there's a human dimension to all this.

Together with the foreign policy team, the department, my office and other great public servants responsible for foreign policy in the Australian public service, I'm proud of our achievements.

I'm proud of the fact that we built a new institution in Asia, which, for the first time in the history of Asia, brings the United States, China, Japan, India, Australia, and all the other countries in the region, around a single table, able 
to discuss and negotiate a peaceful security future for Australia.

I'm proud that we have reformed fundamentally our development partnerships with the island states of the South Pacific, to lift their living standards and reduce infant and child mortality, according to our responsibilities under the Millennium Development Goals.

I'm proud of the fact that we're on track to lift our overseas development assistance to 0.5 percentage gross national income, as I promised prior to the 2007 election.

Also our opening to Burma - the first Western foreign minister to go in there - six or seven months ago, hopefully helping to pave the way for Burma's opening to the rest of the world.

Early action on Libya, a call of which we are all - in our office and in our department - very proud.

Our re-engagement with Europe, and Africa and Latin America - these major economic regions of the future.

And, of course, I am deeply proud of our decision to appoint Australia's first ever ambassador for women and girls, and the announcement, which I now trust the government will give effect to, that is, that during this term we will appoint our first Indigenous Australian as an ambassador, in one of our embassies abroad.

Ladies and gentlemen, there is one over-riding question for my caucus colleagues, and that is, who is best placed to defeat Tony Abbott at the next election?

Mr Abbott, I believe, does not have the temperament or the experience to ever be elected and hold the office - the high office - of Prime Minister of Australia.

But at present, and for a long time now, he's been on track just to do that.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would also like to express my appreciation for the support of my family - Therese, Jessica, Nicholas, Marcus.

Chatting to them over the course of the last several hours I thank them for their encouragement and their support, as always.

And you'll appreciate, I now have much, much to do and therefore I propose to conclude my statement here, and I do not propose to take questions.

Thank you.

Today I announce my decision to stand down from the leadership of the Labour Party. The Party will now select a new Leader.

On 27 June I will tender my resignation from the office of prime minister to the Queen.

I have been prime minister of this country for just over 10 years. In this job, in the world today, that is long enough, for me, but more especially for the country.

Sometimes the only way you conquer the pull of power is to set it down.


It is difficult to know how to make this speech today. There is a judgment to be made on my premiership. And in the end that is, for you, the people, to make.

I can only describe what I think has been done over these last 10 years and, perhaps more important, why.

I have never quite put it like this before.

I was born almost a decade after the Second World War. I was a young man in the social revolution of the 60s and 70s.

I reached political maturity as the Cold War was ending, and the world was going through a political, economic and technological revolution.

I looked at my own country, a great country - wonderful history, magnificent traditions, proud of its past, but strangely uncertain of its future, uncertain about the future, almost old-fashioned.

 I ask you to accept one thing. Hand on heart, I did what I thought was right. I may have been wrong. That's your call  

You stood for individual aspiration and getting on in life or social compassion and helping others. You were liberal in your values or conservative.

You believed in the power of the state or the efforts of the individual. Spending more money on the public realm was the answer or it was the problem.

None of it made sense to me. It was 20th Century ideology in a world approaching a new millennium.

Of course people want the best for themselves and their families, but in an age where human capital is a nation's greatest asset, they also know it is just and sensible to extend opportunities, to develop the potential to succeed, for all - not an elite at the top.

People are, today, open-minded about race and sexuality, averse to prejudice and yet deeply and rightly conservative with a small 'c' when it comes to good manners, respect for others, treating people courteously.

They acknowledge the need for the state and the responsibility of the individual.


They know spending money on our public services matters and that it is not enough. How they are run and organised matters too.

So 1997 was a moment for a new beginning, for sweeping away all the detritus of the past.

Expectations were so high, too high - too high in a way for either of us.

Now in 2007, you can easily point to the challenges, the things that are wrong, the grievances that fester.

But go back to 1997. Think back. No, really, think back. Think about your own living standards then in May 1997 and now.

Visit your local school, any of them round here, or anywhere in modern Britain.

Ask when you last had to wait a year or more on a hospital waiting list, or heard of pensioners freezing to death in the winter, unable to heat their homes.


There is only one government since 1945 that can say all of the following: 'More jobs, fewer unemployed, better health and education results, lower crime and economic growth in every quarter,' - this one.

But I don't need a statistic. There is something bigger than what can be measured in waiting lists or GSCE results or the latest crime or jobs figures.

Look at our economy - at ease with globalisation, London the world's financial centre. Visit our great cities and compare them with 10 years ago.

No country attracts overseas investment like we do.

Think about the culture of Britain in 2007. I don't just mean our arts that are thriving. I mean our values, the minimum wage, paid holidays as a right, amongst the best maternity pay and leave in Europe, equality for gay people.

Or look at the debates that reverberate round the world today - the global movement to support Africa in its struggle against poverty, climate change, the fight against terrorism.

Britain is not a follower. It is a leader. It gets the essential characteristic of today's world - its interdependence.

This is a country today that for all its faults, for all the myriad of unresolved problems and fresh challenges, is comfortable in the 21st Century, at home in its own skin, able not just to be proud of its past but confident of its future.

	
I give my thanks to you, the British people, for the times I have succeeded, and my apologies to you for the times I have fallen short  
I don't think Northern Ireland would have been changed unless Britain had changed, or the Olympics won if we were still the Britain of 1997.

As for my own leadership, throughout these 10 years, where the predictable has competed with the utterly unpredicted, right at the outset one thing was clear to me.

Without the Labour Party allowing me to lead it, nothing could ever have been done.

But I knew my duty was to put the country first. That much was obvious to me when just under 13 years ago I became Labour's Leader.

What I had to learn, however, as prime minister was what putting the country first really meant.



Decision-making is hard. Everyone always says: 'Listen to the people.' The trouble is they don't always agree.

When you are in opposition, you meet this group and they say: 'Why can't you do this?' And you say: 'It's really a good question. Thank you.' And they go away and say: 'Its great, he really listened.'

You meet that other group and they say: 'Why can't you do that?' And you say: 'It's a really good question. Thank you.' And they go away happy you listened.

In government, you have to give the answer - not an answer, the answer.

And, in time, you realise putting the country first doesn't mean doing the right thing according to conventional wisdom or the prevailing consensus or the latest snapshot of opinion.

It means doing what you genuinely believe to be right.

Your duty is to act according to your conviction.

All of that can get contorted so that people think you act according to some messianic zeal.

Doubt, hesitation, reflection, consideration and re-consideration, these are all the good companions of proper decision-making. But the ultimate obligation is to decide.

Sometimes the decisions are accepted quite quickly. Bank of England independence was one, which gave us our economic stability.

Sometimes, like tuition fees or trying to break up old monolithic public services, they are deeply controversial, hellish hard to do, but you can see you are moving with the grain of change round the word.

Sometimes, like with Europe, where I believe Britain should keep its position strong, you know you are fighting opinion, but you are content with doing so.

Sometimes, as with the completely unexpected, you are alone with your own instinct.


In Sierra Leone and to stop ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, I took the decision to make our country one that intervened, that did not pass by, or keep out of the thick of it.

Then came the utterly unanticipated and dramatic - September 11th 2001 and the death of 3,000 or more on the streets of New York.

I decided we should stand shoulder to shoulder with our oldest ally. I did so out of belief.

So Afghanistan and then Iraq - the latter, bitterly controversial.

Removing Saddam and his sons from power, as with removing the Taleban, was over with relative ease.

But the blowback since, from global terrorism and those elements that support it, has been fierce and unrelenting and costly. For many, it simply isn't and can't be worth it.

For me, I think we must see it through. They, the terrorists, who threaten us here and round the world, will never give up if we give up.

	
 The British are special. The world knows it. In our innermost thoughts, we know it. This is the greatest nation on earth  
It is a test of will and of belief. And we can't fail it.

So, some things I knew I would be dealing with. Some I thought I might be. Some never occurred to me on that morning of 2 May 1997 when I came into Downing Street for the first time.

Great expectations not fulfilled in every part, for sure.

Occasionally people say, as I said earlier: 'They were too high, you should have lowered them.'

But, to be frank, I would not have wanted it any other way. I was, and remain, as a person and as a prime minister, an optimist. Politics may be the art of the possible - but at least in life, give the impossible a go.

So of course the vision is painted in the colours of the rainbow, and the reality is sketched in the duller tones of black, white and grey.


But I ask you to accept one thing. Hand on heart, I did what I thought was right.

I may have been wrong. That is your call. But believe one thing if nothing else. I did what I thought was right for our country.

I came into office with high hopes for Britain's future. I leave it with even higher hopes for Britain's future.

This is a country that can, today, be excited by the opportunities not constantly fretful of the dangers.

People often say to me: 'It's a tough job' - not really.

A tough life is the life the young severely disabled children have and their parents, who visited me in Parliament the other week.

Tough is the life my dad had, his whole career cut short at the age of 40 by a stroke. I have been very lucky and very blessed. This country is a blessed nation.

The British are special. The world knows it. In our innermost thoughts, we know it. This is the greatest nation on earth.

It has been an honour to serve it. I give my thanks to you, the British people, for the times I have succeeded, and my apologies to you for the times I have fallen short. Good luck.

Good Afternoon. About twenty years ago, I stood in this very same room here at the council center and asked my neighbors for their help to take a chance on me in electing me to the City Council. Then some seven years later, I asked those same people to join with people in Queens in sending me to Congress.

There is no higher honor in a democracy than to be sent by your neighbors to represent them in the United States House of Representatives. It is particularly humbling to represent this district because the communities and families of the Ninth Congressional district are hard-working, they’re patriotic, they’re opinionated, they are authentic.

I have never forgotten my neighbors because they represent the same middle-class story as mine. I went to public schools my whole life. My mother was a schoolteacher for 32 years. My father went to law school on the G.I. Bill. The middle-class story of New York is my story, and I’m very proud of that.

I am here today to again apologize for the personal mistakes I have made and the embarrassment I have caused. I make this apology to my neighbors and my constituents but I make it particularly to my wife, Huma.

I had hoped to be able to continue the work that the citizens of my district elected me to do: to fight for the middle class and those struggling to make it.

Unfortunately, the distraction that I have created has made that impossible, so today I’m announcing my resignation from Congress, so my colleagues can get back to work, my neighbors can choose a new representative and most importantly that my wife and I can continue to heal from the damage I have caused.

To repeat, most importantly, most importantly, so that I can continue to heal from the damage that I have caused.

I want to thank my colleagues in the House of Representatives, Democrats and Republicans alike. They come from different places around the country, but fundamentally we all agree. They’re all patriots and I will miss them all. Thank you.

I also want to express my gratitude to members of my staff. They’re young people who are not paid very much. They’re people that work very hard and very long hours. Ultimately, those people define the notion of service. I want to thank of course the many people who have helped me, the people who have volunteered, the people who have given me advice, the many of my constituents who have offered me good ideas.

And of course I want to express my gratitude to my family: to my mother and father who instilled in me the values that carried me this far; to my brother, Jason; and of course to my wife, Huma, who has stood with me in this entire difficult period and to whom I owe so very much.

I got into politics to help give voice to the many who simply did not have one. Now I’ll be looking for other ways to contribute my talents to make sure that we live up to that most New York and American of ideals: the idea that leading a family, a community and ultimately a country is the one thing that all unites us, the one thing we’re all focused on.

With God’s help and with hard work we will all be successful. Thank you and good afternoon.

My good friends, after a great deal of thought and deliberation, I have decided next year I will not seek a fifth Congressional term to represent the wonderful people of the Sixth District of Minnesota. After serious consideration, I am confident that this is the right decision. For some, a single two-year House term is enough service. For others, 10 terms, or two decades in the House is still not enough service.

Our Constitution allows for the decision of the length of service in Congress to be determined by the congresspeople themselves, or by the voters in the district.

However, the law limits anyone from serving as President of the United States for more than eight years. And in my opionion, well, eight years is also long enough for an individual to serve as a representative for a specific congressional district.

Be assured, my decision was not in any way influenced by any concerns about my being re-elected to Congress. I've always in the past defeated candidates that were capable, qualified and well-funded. And I have every confidence that if I ran, I would again defeat the individual that I defeated last year, who recently announced that he is once again running.

And rest assured, this decision was not impacted in any way by the recent inquiries into the activities of my former presidential campaign, or my former presidential staff. It was clearly understood that compliance with all rules and regulations was an absolute necessity for my presdiential campaign, and I have no reason to believe that that was not the case.

Last year, after I ran for president, I gave consideration to not running again for the House seat that I hold. However, given that we were only nine months away from the election, I felt it might be difficult for another Republican candidate to get organized for what might have been a very challenging campaign. And I refused to allow this decision to put this Republican seat in jeopardy. And so I ran and I won.

And I felt last year the Republicans had a signficant opportunity to win both the Senate and the White House, and finally put our country back on the track of greatness and American exceptionalism.

That said, different from some, I've never considered holding public office to be an occupation. I've considered it to be both an honor and a privelege, but most importantly, a signficant responsibility. And even when it means resisting the policy positions of many in my own political party, I've always strived to be first and foremost a public servant and do what is best for the people and never acquiesce to being a political servant. There's a difference.

Feel confident, over the next 18 months, I will continue to work 100-hour weeks, and I will continue to do everything that I can to advance our conservative constitutional principles that have served the bedrock for who we are as a nation.

And I will continue to work vehemently and robustly to fight back against what most in the other party want to do, to transform our country into becoming, which would be a nation that our founders would hardly even recognize today.

I proudly have, and I promise you I will continue, to fight to protect innocent human life, traditional marriage, family values, religious liberty and academic excellence, whether working in a bi-partisan way to finally gain federal approval to finally build an immensely significant and long overdue bridge in our district, working to reopen a much needed regional aiport in our district, being the primary sponsor of the bill that recently passed in the House to repeal Obamacare, to recently flying to London to be one of three people to represent the United States of America at the funeral of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who, among her other accomplishments, together with Ronald Reagan, was responsible for bringing down the Soviet Union, to working to alleviate all the stifling economic restrictions that banks and businesses must now endure since the enactment of Dodd-Frank legislation.

I've called out the Muslim jihad terrorists for who they are, and for the evil that they perpetrate upon our people. And I've demanded that this administration never, under any circumstances, subordinate our national security for the administration's weak version of political correctness.

I've identified at the outset of the so-called Arab Spring, this adminsitration's foriegn policy blunders and how those blunders have contributed into turning the Middle East into a devastating, evil, jihadist earthquake.

I've pointed out this administration's dispicable treatment toward our great friend and ally Israel, and at the same time giving little more than lip service to the ever-increasing and dangerous nuclear threat of Iran, making publicly clear this administration's outrageous lack of action in Benghazi, Libya, and the subsequent political coverup which resulted in the deaths of four honorable, dedicated public servants.

I've also called out this administration, and the Treasury Department, for allowing and perhaps even for encouraging partisan, selective enforcement against American citizens based upon their political beliefs that aren't in line with those of the administration.

I've also demanded, consistently, a balanced budget and fiscal responsibility, that this be a preeminent government requirement, so as to avoid the dangers of a future, a financial calamity for our children and the ultimate risk of the destruction of our entire economic system. May it never be.

My core of conviction on these principal issues and more will continue, in a steadfast manner, during the remainder of my term and beyond. Because, you see my decision to seek federal office, both in my initial running for the House, and my decision to run for the presidency of the United States was based solely on my heartfelt concern for our country's future.

Unfortunately, today I am even more concerned about our country's future than I have ever been in the past. On so many issues, we're clearly on the wrong track.

But looking forward, after the completion of my term, my future is full, it is limitless, and my passions for America will remain. And I want you to be assured that there is no future option or opportunity, be it directly in the political arena or otherwise, that I won't be giving serious consideration if it can help save and protect our great nation for future generations.

I fully anticipate the mainstream liberal media to put a detrimental spin on my decision not to seek a fifth term. Since I was first elected to Congress many years ago, they always seem to attempt to find a dishonest way to disparage me. But I take being the focus of their attention and disparagement as a true compliment of my public service effectiveness.

To my many good friends and supporters, I will continue fight for public policy that is first and foremost in the best interest of the citizens of the United States at large. To my detractors, my work continues for your best interests as well.

I especially want to thank my wonderful husband Marcus, for 35 terrific years, our five children, our 23 foster children, my family, you my loyal supporters and all the people in the Sixth Congressional District for this unbelievable opportunity to serve all of you for these years.

And I want to thank God for his blessings upon the United States of America. You see it is God who has given me the strength, the conviction and the personal fortitude to fight to enhance the safety, security, longevity and well being of our blessed nation, the United States of America.

I say to each one of you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.