thank you, lester. our jobs are fleeing the country. they're going to mexico. they're going to many other countries. you look at what china is doing to our country in terms of making our product. they're devaluing their currency, and there's nobody in our government to fight them. and we have a very good fight. and we have a winning fight. because they're using our country as a piggy bank to rebuild china, and many other countries are doing the same thing. so we're losing our good jobs, so many of them. when you look at what's happening in mexico, a friend of mine who builds plants said it's the eighth wonder of the world. they're building some of the biggest plants anywhere in the world, some of the most sophisticated, some of the best plants. with the united states, as he said, not so much. so ford is leaving. you see that, their small car division leaving. thousands of jobs leaving michigan, leaving ohio. they're all leaving. and we can't allow it to happen anymore. as far as child care is concerned and so many other things, i think hillary and i agree on that. we probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts and what we're going to do, but perhaps we'll be talking about that later. but we have to stop our jobs from being stolen from us. we have to stop our companies from leaving the united states and, with it, firing all of their people. all you have to do is take a look at carrier air conditioning in indianapolis. they left -- fired 1,400 people. they're going to mexico. so many hundreds and hundreds of companies are doing this.we cannot let it happen. under my plan, i'll be reducing taxes tremendously, from 35 percent to 15 percent for companies, small and big businesses. that's going to be a job creator like we haven't seen since ronald reagan. it's going to be a beautiful thing to watch. companies will come. they will build. they will expand. new companies will start. and i look very, very much forward to doing it. we have to renegotiate our trade deals, and we have to stop these countries from stealing our companies and our jobs.well, for one thing -- and before we start on that -- my father gave me a very small loan in 1975, and i built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars, with some of the greatest assets in the world, and i say that only because that's the kind of thinking that our country needs. our country's in deep trouble. we don't know what we're doing when it comes to devaluations and all of these countries all over the world, especially china. they're the best, the best ever at it. what they're doing to us is a very, very sad thing. so we have to do that. we have to renegotiate our trade deals. and, lester, they're taking our jobs, they're giving incentives, they're doing things that, frankly, we don't do. let me give you the example of mexico. they have a vat tax. we're on a different system. when we sell into mexico, there's a tax. when they sell in -- automatic, 16 percent, approximately. when they sell into us, there's no tax. it's a defective agreement. it's been defective for a long time, many years, but the politicians haven't done anything about it. now, in all fairness to secretary clinton -- yes, is that ok? good. i want you to be very happy. it's very important to me. but in all fairness to secretary clinton, when she started talking about this, it was really very recently. she's been doing this for 30 years. and why hasn't she made the agreements better? the nafta agreement is defective. just because of the tax and many other reasons, but just because of the fact...secretary clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this for years, not right now, because of the fact that we've created a movement. they should have been doing this for years. what's happened to our jobs and our country and our economy generally is -- look, we owe $20 trillion. we cannot do it any longer, lester.well, the first thing you do is don't let the jobs leave. the companies are leaving. i could name, i mean, there are thousands of them. they're leaving, and they're leaving in bigger numbers than ever. and what you do is you say, fine, you want to go to mexico or some other country, good luck. we wish you a lot of luck. but if you think you're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or your cookies or whatever you make and bring them into our country without a tax, you're wrong. and once you say you're going to have to tax them coming in, and our politicians never do this, because they have special interests and the special interests want those companies to leave, because in many cases, they own the companies. so what i'm saying is, we can stop them from leaving. we have to stop them from leaving. and that's a big, big factor.that's called business, by the way. [interruption]i did not. i did not. i do not say that. [interruption]i do not say that. [interruption]she talks about solar panels. we invested in a solar company, our country. that was a disaster. they lost plenty of money on that one. now, look, i'm a great believer in all forms of energy, but we're putting a lot of people out of work. our energy policies are a disaster. our country is losing so much in terms of energy, in terms of paying off our debt. you can't do what you're looking to do with $20 trillion in debt. the obama administration, from the time they've come in, is over 230 years' worth of debt, and he's topped it. he's doubled it in a course of almost eight years, seven-and-a-half years, to be semi- exact. so i will tell you this. we have to do a much better job at keeping our jobs. and we have to do a much better job at giving companies incentives to build new companies or to expand, because they're not doing it. and all you have to do is look at michigan and look at ohio and look at all of these places where so many of their jobs and their companies are just leaving, they're gone. and, hillary, i'd just ask you this. you've been doing this for 30 years. why are you just thinking about these solutions right now? for 30 years, you've been doing it, and now you're just starting to think of solutions.i will bring -- excuse me. i will bring back jobs. you can't bring back jobs.yeah, for 30 years. [interruption]well, he approved nafta… [interruption] (crosstalk)he approved nafta, which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country. [interruption]but you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or any number you want to...you haven't done it. you haven't done it. [interruption]excuse me. [interruption]your husband signed nafta, which was one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.you go to new england, you go to ohio, pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, secretary clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacture is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent. nafta is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere, but certainly ever signed in this country. and now you want to approve trans-pacific partnership. you were totally in favor of it. then you heard what i was saying, how bad it is, and you said, i can't win that debate. but you know that if you did win, you would approve that, and that will be almost as bad as nafta. nothing will ever top nafta.you called it the gold standard. [interruption] (crosstalk)you called it the gold standard of trade deals. you said it's the finest deal you've ever seen. [interruption]and then you heard what i said about it, and all of a sudden you were against it. [interruption]not. [interruption]so is it president obama's fault? [interruption]is it president obama's fault? [interruption]secretary, is it president obama's fault? [interruption]because he's pushing it. [interruption]but you have no plan. [interruption]secretary, you have no plan. [interruption]that's about all you've… [interruption] (crosstalk)you are going to approve one of the biggest tax cuts in history. you are going to approve one of the biggest tax increases in history. you are going to drive business out. your regulations are a disaster, and you're going to increase regulations all over the place. [interruption] and by the way, my tax cut is the biggest since ronald reagan. i'm very proud of it. it will create tremendous numbers of new jobs. but regulations, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existence. when i go around -- lester, i tell you this, i've been all over. and when i go around, despite the tax cut, the thing -- the things that business as in people like the most is the fact that i'm cutting regulation. you have regulations on top of regulations, and new companies cannot form and old companies are going out of business. and you want to increase the regulations and make them even worse. i'm going to cut regulations. i'm going to cut taxes big league, and you're going to raise taxes big league, end of story.facts. [interruption]and take a look at mine, also, and you'll see. [interruption]well, could i just finish -- i think i… [interruption] (crosstalk)i think i should -- you go to her website, and you take a look at her website.she's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion.and look at her website. you know what? it's no difference than this. she's telling us how to fight isis. just go to her website. she tells you how to fight isis on her website. i don't think general douglas macarthur would like that too much.no, no, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do. [interruption]see, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do. no wonder you've been fighting -- no wonder you've been fighting isis your entire adult life. [interruption]well, i'm really calling for major jobs, because the wealthy are going create tremendous jobs. they're going to expand their companies. they're going to do a tremendous job. i'm getting rid of the carried interest provision. and if you really look, it's not a tax -- it's really not a great thing for the wealthy. it's a great thing for the middle class. it's a great thing for companies to expand. and when these people are going to put billions and billions of dollars into companies, and when they're going to bring $2.5 trillion back from overseas, where they can't bring the money back, because politicians like secretary clinton won't allow them to bring the money back, because the taxes are so onerous, and the bureaucratic red tape, so what -- is so bad. so what they're doing is they're leaving our country, and they're, believe it or not, leaving because taxes are too high and because some of them have lots of money outside of our country. and instead of bringing it back and putting the money to work, because they can't work out a deal to -- and everybody agrees it should be brought back. instead of that, they're leaving our country to get their money, because they can't bring their money back into our country, because of bureaucratic red tape, because they can't get together. because we have -- we have a president that can't sit them around a table and get them to approve something. and here's the thing. republicans and democrats agree that this should be done, $2.5 trillion. i happen to think it's double that. it's probably $5 trillion that we can't bring into our country, lester. and with a little leadership, you'd get it in here very quickly, and it could be put to use on the inner cities and lots of other things, and it would be beautiful. but we have no leadership. and honestly, that starts with secretary clinton.why not? [interruption]there's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into their country. [interruption]yes. [interruption]then you didn't read it. [interruption]who gave it that name? the first i've -- who gave it that name? [interruption] (crosstalk)how much? how much for my family? [interruption]lester, how much? [interruption]typical politician. all talk, no action. sounds good, doesn't work. never going to happen. our country is suffering because people like secretary clinton have made such bad decisions in terms of our jobs and in terms of what's going on. [interruption] now, look, we have the worst revival of an economy since the great depression. and believei don't mind releasing -- i'm under a routine audit. and it'll be released. and -- as soon as the audit's finished, it will be released. but you will learn more about donald trump by going down to the federal elections, where i filed a 104-page essentially financial statement of sorts, the forms that they have. it shows income -- in fact, the income -- i just looked today -- the income is filed at $694 million for this past year, $694 million. if you would have told me i was going to make that 15 or 20 years ago, i would have been very surprised. but that's the kind of thinking that our country needs. when we have a country that's doing so badly, that's being ripped off by every single country in the world, it's the kind of thinking that our country needs, because everybody -- lester, we have a trade deficit with all of the countries that we do business with, of almost $800 billion a year. you know what that is? that means, who's negotiating these trade deals? we have people that are political hacks negotiating our trade deals.excuse me.well, i told you, i will release them as soon as the audit. look, i've been under audit almost for 15 years. i know a lot of wealthy people that have never been audited. i said, do you get audited? i get audited almost every year. and in a way, i should be complaining. i'm not even complaining. i don't mind it. it's almost become a way of life. i get audited by the irs. but other people don't. i will say this. we have a situation in this country that has to be taken care of. i will release my tax returns -- against my lawyer's wishes -- when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted. as soon as she releases them, i will release. (applause) i will release my tax returns. and that's against -- my lawyers, they say, "don't do it." i will tell you this. no -- in fact, watching shows, they're reading the papers. almost every lawyer says, you don't release your returns until the audit's complete. when the audit's complete, i'll do it. but i would go against them if she releases her e-mails.it's not negotiable, no. let her release the e-mails. why did she delete 33,000...that makes me smart. [interruption]that's for sure.that was more than a mistake. that was done purposely. ok? that was not a mistake. that was done purposely. when you have your staff taking the fifth amendment, taking the fifth so they're not prosecuted, when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the fifth, i think it's disgraceful. and believe me, this country thinks it's -- really thinks it's disgraceful, also. as far as my tax returns, you don't learn that much from tax returns. that i can tell you. you learn a lot from financial disclosure. and you should go down and take a look at that. the other thing, i'm extremely underleveraged. the report that said $650 -- which, by the way, a lot of friends of mine that know my business say, boy, that's really not a lot of money. it's not a lot of money relative to what i had. the buildings that were in question, they said in the same report, which was -- actually, it wasn't even a bad story, to be honest with you, but the buildings are worth $3.9 billion. and the $650 isn't even on that. but it's not $650. it's much less than that. but i could give you a list of banks, i would -- if that would help you, i would give you a list of banks. these are very fine institutions, very fine banks. i could do that very quickly. i am very underleveraged. i have a great company. i have a tremendous income. and the reason i say that is not in a braggadocios way. it's because it's about time that this country had somebody running it that has an idea about money. when we have $20 trillion in debt, and our country's a mess, you know, it's one thing to have $20 trillion in debt and our roads are good and our bridges are good and everything's in great shape, our airports. our airports are like from a third world country. you land at laguardia, you land at kennedy, you land at lax, you land at newark, and you come in from dubai and qatar and you see these incredible -- you come in from china, you see these incredible airports, and you land -- we've become a third world country. so the worst of all things has happened. we owe $20 trillion, and we're a mess. we haven't even started. and we've spent $6 trillion in the middle east, according to a report that i just saw. whether it's 6 or 5, but it looks like it's 6, $6 trillion in the middle east, we could have rebuilt our country twice. and it's really a shame. and it's politicians like secretary clinton that have caused this problem. our country has tremendous problems. we're a debtor nation. we're a serious debtor nation. and we have a country that needs new roads, new tunnels, new bridges, new airports, new schools, new hospitals. and we don't have the money, because it's been squandered on so many of your ideas.it would be squandered, too, believe me.maybe he didn't do a good job and i was unsatisfied with his work...which our country should do, too.wrong. wrong.so, yeah, i think -- i do think it's time. look, it's all words, it's all sound bites. i built an unbelievable company. some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets anywhere in the world, beyond the united states, in europe, lots of different places. it's an unbelievable company. but on occasion, four times, we used certain laws that are there. and when secretary clinton talks about people that didn't get paid, first of all, they did get paid a lot, but taken advantage of the laws of the nation. now, if you want to change the laws, you've been there a long time, change the laws. but i take advantage of the laws of the nation because i'm running a company. my obligation right now is to do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies. and that's what i do. but what she doesn't say is that tens of thousands of people that are unbelievably happy and that love me. i'll give you an example. we're just opening up on pennsylvania avenue right next to the white house, so if i don't get there one way, i'm going to get to pennsylvania avenue another. but we're opening the old post office. under budget, ahead of schedule, saved tremendous money. i'm a year ahead of schedule. and that's what this country should be doing. we build roads and they cost two and three and four times what they're supposed to cost. we buy products for our military and they come in at costs that are so far above what they were supposed to be, because we don't have people that know what they're doing. when we look at the budget, the budget is bad to a large extent because we have people that have no idea as to what to do and how to buy. the trump international is way under budget and way ahead of schedule. and we should be able to do that for our country.first of all, secretary clinton doesn't want to use a couple of words. and that's law and order. and we need law and order. if we don't have it, we're not going to have a country. and when i look at what's going on in charlotte, a city i love, city where i have investments, when i look at what's going on throughout various parts of our country -- i can just keep naming them all day long -- we need law and order in our country. and i just got today, as you know, the endorsement of the fraternal order of police, it just came in. we have endorsements from, i think, almost every police group, very -- i mean, a large percentage of them in the united states. we have a situation where we have our inner cities, african-americans, hispanics, are living in hell, because it's so dangerous.you walk down the street, you get shot. in chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands, since january 1st. thousands of shootings. and i say, where is this? is this a war-torn country? what are we doing? and we have to stop the violence, we have to bring back law and order, in a place like chicago, where thousands of people have been killed. thousands, over the last number of years. in fact, almost 4,000 have been killed since barack obama became president. over 4 -- almost 4,000 people in chicago have been killed. we have to bring back law and order. now, whether or not in a place like chicago, you do stop and frisk, which worked very well, mayor giuliani is here, it worked very well in new york. it brought the crime rate way down, but you take the gun away from criminals that shouldn't be having it. we have gangs roaming the street. and in many cases, they're illegally here, illegal immigrants. and they have guns. and they shoot people. and we have to be very strong. and we have to be very vigilant. we have to be -- we have to know what we're doing. right now, our police, in many cases, are afraid to do anything. we have to protect our inner cities, because african-american communities are being decimated by crime.no, you're wrong. it went before a judge who was a very against police judge. it was taken away from her and our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case. they would have won an appeal. if you look at it, throughout the country, there are many places --no, the argument is that we have to take the guns away from these people that have them and that are bad people that shouldn’t have them. these are felons, these are people that are bad people that shouldn't be -- when you have 3,000 shootings in chicago, from january 1st, when you have 4,000 people killed in chicago by guns, from the beginning of the presidency of barack obama, his hometown, you have to have stop and frisk. you need more police, you need a better community, you know, relation. you don't have good community relations in chicago. it's terrible. i have property there. it's terrible what’s going on in chicago. but when when you look -- and chicago's not the only -- you go to ferguson, you go to so many different places. you need better relationships -- i agree with secretary clinton on this -- you need better relationships between the communities and the police. because in some cases it's not good. but you look at dallas, where the relationships were really studied, the relationships were really a beautiful thing, and then five police officers were killed one night very violently. so there's some bad things going on. some really bad things.lester, we need law and order. we need law and order in the inner cities. because the people that are most affected by what's happening are african-american and hispanic people. and it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen.[groan]i'd like to respond.first of all, i agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give certain rights to people on watch lists and no fly lists. i agree with you, when a person is on a watch list or a no fly list -- and i have the endorsement of the nra, which i'm very proud of, these are very very good people, and they are protecting the second amendment -- but i think we have to look very strongly at no fly lists and watch lists, and when people are on there, even if they shouldn't be on there, we'll help them, we'll help them legally, we'll help them get off. but i tend to agree with that, quite strongly. i do want to bring up the fact that you were the one that brought up the word super predator about young black youth. that's a term that i think was a -- it's been horribly met as you know. i think you apologized for it. but i think it was a terrible thing to say, and when it comes to stop and frisk, you know, you're talking about takes guns away. well i'm talking about taking guns away from gangs and people that use them. i don't think -- i really don't think you disagree with me on this, if you want to know the truth. i think there's a political reason why you can't say, i really don't believe. in new york city, stop and frisk, we had 2,200 murders and stop and frisk brought it down to 500 murders, 500 is a lot of murders. hard to believe, 500 is supposed to be good. we went from 2,200 to 500, and it was continued on by mayor bloomberg. and it was terminated by our current mayor. stop and frisk had a tremendous impact on the safety of new york city. tremendous beyond belief. when you say it has no impact, it really did, it had a very big impact.you're wrong.murders are up.i'd like to responded if i might.look, the african-american community has been let down by our politicians. they talk good around election time, like right now, and after the election, they said, see ya later, i'll see you in four years. the african-american community -- look, the community within the inner cities has been so badly treated, they've been abused and used in order to get votes by democrat politicians, that's what it is. they've controlled these communities for up to 100 years.you look at the inner cities, i just left detroit, i just left philadelphia. you've seen me, i've been all over the place. you decided to stay home and that's ok. i will tell you, i've been all over, and i've met some of the greatest people i'll ever meet within these communities. and they are very very upset with what their politicians have told them and what their politicians have done.i'll tell you, it’s simple to say. sidney blumenthal works for the campaign and close -- very close friend of secretary clinton. and her campaign manager patti doyle went to -- during the campaign, her campaign against president obama, fought very hard, and you can go look it up and you can check it out, if you look at cnn this past week, patti doyle was on wolf blitzer saying that this happened, blumenthal sent mcclatchy to kenya to find out about it, they were pressing very hard. they failed to get the birth certificate. when i got involved i didn't fail, i got him to give the birth certificate. i'm satisfied with it.i want to get on to defeating isis, to creating jobs. i want to get on to having a strong border. i want to get on to things that are very important to me, and that are very important to the country.nobody was pressing it, nobody was caring much about it. i figured you'd ask the question tonight, of course. i was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate, and i think i did a good job. secretary clinton also fought it, i mean, you know -- now, everybody in mainstream is going to say, that's not true. look, it's true. sidney blumenthal sent a reporter -- you just have to take a look at cnn, the last week, the interview with your former campaign manager. and she was involved. but just like she can't bring back jobs, she can't produce.well, i say nothing, because i was able to get him to produce it. he should have produced it a long time before. i say nothing. when you talk about healing, i think that i've developed very, very good relationships, over the last little while with the african-american community. i think you can see that. and i feel like they really wanted me to come to that conclusion, and i think i did a great job and a great service, not only for the country but even for the president in getting him to produce his birth certificate.i would love to respond. first of all, i got to watch in preparing for this, some of your debates against barack obama. you treated him with terrible disrespect, and i watched the way you talk now about how lovely everything is, and how wonderful you are -- it doesn't work that way. you were after him, you were trying to -- you even sent out or your campaign sent out pictures of him in a certain garb, very famous pictures, i don't think you can deny that. just last week, your campaign manager said it was true. so when you tried to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work. as far as the lawsuit, yes, when i was very young, i went into my father's company. we along with many, many other companies throughout the country, it was a federal lawsuit, were sued. we settled the suit with zero -- no admission of guilt. it was very easy to do. but they sued many people. i notice you bring that up a lot. and i also notice the nasty commercials you do on me in so many different ways, which i don't do on you. maybe i'm trying to save the money. frankly, i look at that, and i say, isn't that amazing? i settled that lawsuit with no admission of guilt, but that was a lawsuit brought against many, many real estate firms, it's one of those things.i'll go one step further. in palm beach, florida, tough community, a brilliant community, a wealthy community, probably the wealthiest community there is in the world, i opened a club, and really got great credit for it, no discrimination against african-americans, against muslims, against anybody. and it's a tremendously successful club. and i'm so glad i did it, and i have been given great credit for what i did. and i'm very very proud of it. and that's the way i feel. that is the true way i feel.i do want to say that i was just endorsed, and more are coming next week, it will be over 200 admirals. many of them are here, admirals and generals endorsed me to lead this country. that just happened. and many more are coming. and i'm very proud of it. in addition, i was just endorse the by ice. they’ve never endorsed anybody before, on immigration. i was just endorsed by ice. i was just recently endorsed, 16,500 border patrol agents. so when secretary clinton talks about this, i mean, i'll take the admirals and i’ll take the generals any day over the political hacks that i see that have led our country so brilliantly over the last 10 years with their knowledge.because look at the mess that we're in. look at the mess that we're in. as far as the cyber, i agree to parts of what secretary clinton said, we should be better than anybody else, and perhaps we're not. i don't think anybody knows it was russia that broke into the dnc. she's saying russia, russia, russia. maybe it was. i mean, it could be russia, but it could also be china, but it could also be lots of other people, it also could be someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, ok? you don't know who broke into dnc, but what did we learn with dnc? we learn that bernie sanders was taken advantage of by your people. by debbie wasserman schultz. look what happened to her. but bernie sanders was taken advantage of. that’s what it is.now, whether that was russia, whether that was china, whether it was another country, we don't know, because the truth is, under president obama we've lost control of things that we used to have control over. we came in with an internet, we came up with the internet. and i think secretary clinton and myself would agree very much, when you look at what isis is doing with the internet, they're beating us at our own game. isis. so we have to get very, very tough on cyber and cyber warfare. it is a, it is a huge problem. i have a son. he's 10 years old. he has computers. he is so good with these computers, it's unbelievable. the security aspect of cyber is very, very tough. and maybe it's hardly do-able. but i will say, we are not doing the job we should be doing, but that's true throughout our whole governmental society. we have so many things that we have to do better, lester, and certainly cyber is one of them.first i have to say one thing, very important. secretary clinton is talking about taking out isis -- we will take out isis. well, president obama and secretary clinton created a vacuum the way they got out of iraq, because they got out, well they shouldn't have been in, but once they got in, the way they got out was a disaster. and isis was formed. so she talks about taking them out -- she's been doing it a long time, she’s been trying to take them out for a long time. she's been trying to take them out for a long time. but they wouldn't even have been formed if they left some troops behind. like 10,000 or maybe something more than that. and then you wouldn't have had them.or, as i've been saying for a long time, and i think you'll agree, because i said it to you once -- had we taken the oil, and we should have taken the oil, isis would not have been able to form either, because the oil was their primary source of income. and now they have the oil all over the place, including the oil, a lot of the oil in libya. which was another one of her disasters.wrong.wrong.wrong.i have to respond.the secretary said very strongly about working with, we've been working with them for many years, and we have the greatest mess anyone's ever seen. you look at the middle east, it’s a total mess. under your direction, to a large extent. but you look at the middle east. you started the iran deal. that's another beauty where you have a country that was ready to fall, i mean they were doing so badly, they were choking on the sanctions, and now they're going to be actually probably a major power at some point pretty soon the way they’re going. but when you look at nato, i was asked on a major show, what do you think of nato? you have to understand i'm a business person, i did really well, but i have common sense. i said well, i'll tell you, i haven’t given lots of thought to nato, but twoand number two, i said and very strongly, nato could be obsolete, because, and i was very strong on this, and it was actually covered very accurately in the new york times, which is unusual for the new york times to be honest, but i said they do not focus on terror. and i was very strong. and i said it numerous times. and about four months ago, i read on the front page of the wall street journal that nato is opening up a major terror division, and i think that's great. and i think we should get, because we pay approximately 73 percent of the cost of nato. it's a lot of money to protect other people. but i'm all for nato. but i said they have to focus on terror also. and they're going to do that. and that was, believe me, i'm sure i'm not going to get credit for it, but that was largely because of what i was saying and my criticism of nato. i think we have to get nato to go into the middle east with us. in addition to surrounding nations, and we have to knock the hell out of isis. and we have to it fast. when isis formed in this vacuum created by barack obama and secretary clinton, and believe me, you were the ones that took out the troops. not only that, you named the day. they couldn’t believe it. they sat back and ...no, wait a minute. when they formed, when they formed, this is something that never should have happened. it should never happened. now you're talking about taking out isis. but you were there, and you were secretary of state when it was a little infant. now it's in over 30 countries, and you're going to stop them? i don't think so.i did not support the war in iraq.that is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her, because she frankly, i think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media. would you like to hear? i was against the war, wait a minute. i was against the war in iraq. just so you put it out.it does not show that. the record shows that i'm right. when i did an interview with howard stern, very lightly, the first time anybody's asked me that, i said, very lightly, i don’t know, maybe, who knows. essentially. i then did an interview with neil cavuto, we talked about the economy, it’s more important. i then spoke to sean hannity, which everybody refuses to call sean hannity. i had numerous conversationa with sean hannity at fox. and sean hannity said -- and he called me the other day and i spoke to him about it and he said you were totally against the war, because he was for the war and that was before the war started. sean hannity said very strongly, to me and other people, he's willing to say, but nobody wants to call him, i was against the war. he said you used to have fights with me, because sean was in favor of the war. and i understand that side also. not very much, because we should have never been there, but nobody called sean hannity. and then they did an article in a major magazine, shortly after the war started. i think in '04. but they did an article, which had me totally against the war in iraq. and one of your compatriots said, you know, whether it was before or right after, trump was definite because if you read this article, there's no doubt. but if somebody, and i'll ask the press, if somebody would call up sean hannity, this was before the war started. he and i used to have arguments about the war. i said it's a terrible and a stupid thing. it's going to destabilize the middle east. and that’s exactly what this's done.you didn't hear what i said.i have better judgment than she does, there’s no question about that. i also have a much better temperament than she has, you know? i have a much better. she spent, let me tell you. she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an advertising -- you know, they got madison avenue into a room, oh, temperament, let's go after. i think my strongest asset, maybe by far is my temperament, i have a winning temperament, i know how to win. she does not --that would not start a war.they were taunting us --wrong.that's lies.that line is getting a little bit old, i have to say.it's not an accurate one at all. it’s not an accurate one. so, i just want to give a lot of things and just to respond. i agree with her on one thing. the single greatest problem the world has is nuclear armament, nuclear weapons. not global warming, like you think and your president thinks. nuclear is the single greatest threat. just to go down the list, we defend japan. we defend germany. we defend south korea, we defend saudi arabia. we defend countries. they do not pay us what they should be paying us, because we are providing tremendous service and we’re losing a fortune, that’s why we’re losing. we’re losing-we lose on everything. i say who makes these? we lose on everything. all i said, that it's very possible that if they don't pay a fair share, because this is isn't 40 years ago where we could do what we're doing. we can't defend japan, a behemoth selling us cars by the millions.alright, but it’s very important. all i said is they may have to defend themselves or they have to help us out. we're a country that owes $20 trillion. they have to help us out. as far as the nuclear is concerned, i agree. it is the single greatest threat that this country has.well, i have to say that, you know, for, what secretary clinton was saying about nuclear with russia. she’s very cavalier in the way she talks about various countries. but russia has been expanding their, they have a much newer capability than we do. we have not been updating from the new standpoint. i looked the other night, i was seeing b-52s, they’re old enough that your father, your grandfather could be flying them. we are not keeping up with other countries. i'd like everybody to end it, just get rid of it, but i would certainly not do first strike. i think that once the nuclear alternative happens, it's over. at the same time, we have to be prepared. i can't take anything off the table. because you look at some of these countries, you look at north korea, we're doing nothing there. china should solve that problem for us. china should go into north korea, china is totally powerful as it relates to north korea.and by the way, another one powerful is, the worst deal i think i've ever seen negotiated that you started, is the iran deal. iran is one of their biggest trading partners. iran has power over north korea. and when they made that horrible deal with iran, they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to north korea and they should have done something with respect to yemen and all these other places, and when asked to secretary kerry, why didn't you do that? why didn’t you add other things into the deal? one of the great giveaways of all time, of all time, including $400 million in cash. nobody's ever seen that before. that turned out to be wrong, it was actually $1.7 billion in cash. obviously, i guess for the hostages, it certainly looks that way. so you say to yourself, why didn't they make the right deal? this is one of the worst deals ever made by any country in history. the deal with iran will lead to nuclear problems, all they have to do is sit back 10 years, and they don't have to do much. and they’re gonna end up getting nuclear. i met with bibi netanyahu the other day, believe me, he's not a happy camper.lester, ne thing i'd like to say.i will be very quickly. but i will tell you, hillary will tell you to go to her website and read all about how to defeat isis, which she could have defeated by never having it, you know, get going in the first place. right now it's getting tougher and tougher to defeat them, because they're in more and more places, more and more states, more and more nations and it's a big problem, and as far as japan is concerned, i want to help all of our allies. but we are losing billions and billions of dollars. we cannot be the policeman of the world. we cannot protect countries all over the world.where they're not paying us what we need.she doesn’t say that, because she has no business ability. we need heart, we need a lot of things, but you have to have some basic ability. and sadly, she doesn't have that. all of the things that she's talking about could have been taken care of during the last ten years, let's say, while she had great power, but they weren't taken care. and if she ever wins this race, they won't be taken care of.she doesn't have the look. she doesn't have the stamina. i said she doesn't have the stamina, and i don't believe she does have the stamina. to be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.wait a minute, lester. you asked me a question. did you ask me a question? you have to be able to negotiate our trade deals. you have to be able to negotiate. that's right. with japan, with saudi arabia. i mean, can you imagine, we're defending saudi arabia and with all of the money they have, we're defending them, and they're not paying, all you have to do is speak to them. wait, you have so many different things, you have to be able to do, and i don't believe that hillary has the stamina.the world. (cheers and applause)let me tell you. let me tell you. hillary has experience, but it's bad experience. we have made so many bad deals during the last -- so she has experience, i agree. but it's bad, bad experience, whether it's the iran deal that you're so in love with, where we gave them $150 billion back. whether it’s the iran deal, whether it’s uh, anything -- man, you almost can't name a good deal. i agree, she's got experience, but it's bad experience. and this country can't afford to have another four years of that kind of bad experience. (cheers and applause)i never said that.didn’t say that.where did you find this? where did you find this?ok, good. let me just tell you.hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials. some of it's said in entertainment, some of it’s said to somebody who's been very tough to me, rosie o'donnell. i said very tough things to her and i think that everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her. but you want to know the truth? i was going to say something --extremely rough to hillary, to her family, and i said to myself, i can't do it. i just can't do it. it's inappropriate. it's not nice. but she's spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me, many of which are absolutely untrue, they’re and they're misrepresentations, and i will tell you this, lester, it's not nice, and i don't deserve that, but it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done. it’s hundreds of millions of ads. and the only gratifying thing is i saw the polls come in today, and with all of that money---- over $200 million spent, and i'm either winning or tied. and i’ve spent practically nothing.i want to make america great again. we are a nation that is seriously troubled. we’re losing our jobs, people are pouring into our country. the other day we were deporting 800 people. and perhaps they pressed the wrong button, they press the wrong button, or perhaps worse than that, it was corruption. but these people that we were going to deport for good reason ended up becoming citizens. ended up becoming citizens, and it was 800, and now it turns out, it might be 1800, and they don't even know.i want to make america great again. i’m going to be able to do it, i don’t think hillary will. the answer is, if she wins, i will absolutely support her.well i’ll actually agree with that. i agree with everything she said. i began this campaign because i was so tired of seeing such foolish things happen to our country. this is a great country. this is a great land. i have gotten to know the people of the country over the last year and a half that i have been doing this as a politician. i cannot believe i'm saying that about myself, but i guess i have been a politician. and my whole concept was to make america great again. when i watch the deals being made. when i watch what's happening with some horrible things like obamacare where your health insurance and health care is going up by numbers that areno, i didn’t say that at all. i don't think you understood what was said. this was locker room talk. i am not proud of it. i apologize to my family, i apologized to the american people. certainly, i am not proud of it. but this is locker room talk. you know, when we have a world where you have isis chopping off heads, where you have them, frankly, drowning people in steel cages, where you have wars and horrible, horrible sights all over and you have so many bad things happening, this is like medieval times. we haven’t seen anything likes this. the carnage all over the world and they look and they see, can you imagine the people that are frankly doing so well against us with isis and they look at our country and see what's going on. yes, i am very embarrassed by it and i hate it, but it's locker room talk and it’s one of those things. i will knock the hell out of isis. we are going to defeat isis. isis happened a number of years ago in a vacuum that was left because of bad judgment. and i will tell you, i will take care of isis. we need to get on to much more important and bigger things.i have great respect for women. nobody has more respect for women than i do.frankly, you hear these things. they are said. and i was am embarrassed by it. but i have respect for women---- and they have respect for me. and i will tell you, no i have not. and i will tell you, that i’m going to make our country safe and we’re going to have borders which we don't have now. people are pouring into our country and they’re coming in from the middle east and other places. we’re gonna make america safe again, we’re gonna make america great again but we’re gonna make america safe again and we’re gonna make america wealthy again. because if you don't do that, it just, it sounds harsh to say, but we have to build up the wealth of our nation. other nations are taking our job and they’re taking our wealth.i’d like to respond to that. i assume i can.it's just words, folks. it's just words. these words, i have been hearing for many years. i heard them when they were running for the senate in new york where hillary was going to bring back jobs to upstate new york and she failed. i’ve heard them where hillary is constantly talking about the inner cities of our country which are a disaster education-wise, job-wise, safety-wise, in every way possible. i’m going to help the african-americans, i’m going to help the latinos, hispanics. i am going to help the inner cities. she has done a terrible job for the african-americans. she wants their vote and she does nothing. and then she comes back four years later, we saw that firsthand when she saw united states senator, she campaigned where--she is allowed to do that, but i'm not? sounds fair, sounds fair.that was locker room talk. i'm not proud of it. i am a person who has great respect for people, for my family, for the people of this country and certainly i am not proud of it, but that was something that happened. if you look at bill clinton, far worse. mine are words and his was action. his words, what he has done to women. there’s never been anybody in the history of politics in this nation that has been so abusive to women. so you can say any way you want to say it, but bill clinton is abusive to women. hillary clinton attacked those same women, and attacked them viciously, four of them here tonight. one of the women, who is a wonderful woman at 12 years old was raped. at 12. her client, she represented, got him off and she is seen laughing on two occasions laughing at the girl who was raped. kathy shelton, that young woman, is here with us tonight. so don't tell me about words. i am, absolutely, i apologize for those words, but it is things that people say, but what president clinton did, he was impeached, he lost his license to practice law, he had to pay an $850,000 fine to one of the women. paula jones who is also here tonight. and i will tell you that when hillary brings up a point like that and she talks about words that i said 11 years ago, i think it's disgraceful and i think she should be ashamed of herself, if you want to know the truth.well you owe the president an apology because as you know very well, your campaign, sidney blumenthal, he’s another real winner that you have and he’s the one that got this started along with your campaign manager and they were on television just two weeks ago, she was saying exactly that. so you really owe him an apology. you’re the one that sent the pictures around, your campaign sent the pictures around with president obama in a certain garb, that was long before i was ever involved. so you actually owe an apology. number two, michelle obama. i’ve gotten to see the commercials that they did on you and the i’ve gotten to see some of the most vicious commercials i’ve ever seen, of michelle obama talking about you, hillary. so you talk about framed, go back and take a look at those commercials. a race where you lost, fair and square, unlike the bernie sanders race where you won, but not fair and square, in my opinion and all you have to do is take a look at wikileaks and just see what they said about bernie sanders and see what debra wasserman schultz had in mind, because bernie sanders, between superdelegates and debra wasserman schultz, he never had a chance and i was so surprised to see him sign on with the devil. but when we talk about apology, i think the one that you should really be apologizing for, the thing that you should be apologizing for are the 33,000 e-mails that you deleted and that you acid washed and the two boxes of e-mails and other things last week that were taken from an office and are now missing. and i tell you what, i didn't think i would say this, but i'm going to and i hate to say it. but if i win, i am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation. because there has never been so many lies, so much deception. there has never been anything like it. and we’re gonna have a special prosecutor. when i speak, i go out and speak, the people of this country are furious. in my opinion, the people that have been long time workers at the fbi are furious. there has never been anything like this where e-mails, and you get a subpoena. you get a subpoena, and after getting the subpoena you delete 33,000 e-mails and then you acid wash them or bleach them, as you would say. very expensive process. so we’re gonna get a special prosecutor and we’re gonna look into it. because you know what, people have been -- their lives have been destroyed for doing 1/5 of what you have done. and it’s a disgrace, and honestly, you oughta be ashamed of yourself.because you would be in jail. [applause]and yet she didn't know the word, the letter c on a document. right? she didn't even know what that letter meant. you know, it's amazing. i'm watching hillary go over facts and she is going after fact after fact and she’s lying again because she said she, you know, what she did with e-mails was fine. you think it was fine to delete 33,000 e-mails? i don't think so. she said that 33,000 e-mails had to do with her daughter's wedding, number one and a yoga class. well, maybe we will give three or three or four or five or something. 33,000 e-mails deleted and now she’s saying there wasn’t anything wrong. and more importantly, that was after getting a subpoena. that wasn’t before. that was after. she got it from the united states congress, and i will be honest. i am so disappointed in congressmen, including republicans, for allowing this to happen. our justice department where her husband goes on to the back of an airplane for 39 minutes, talks to the attorney general days before a ruling has to be made on her case. but for you to say that there was nothing wrong with you deleting 39,000 e-mails, again, you should be ashamed of yourself. what you did, now this was after getting a subpoena from the united states congress--hold on, wait a minute, if a member of the private sector did that, they’d be in jail. let alone, after getting a subpoena from the united states congress.you didn't delete them?what are about the other 15,000.because you had nothing to say.and get off this question.let’s see what happens.i’d liked to know anderson, why aren't you bringing up the e-mails? i’d like to know.no it hasn’t, it hasn’t and it hasn't been finished at all.one on three.no, i'm a gentlemen, hillary. go ahead.it is such a great question and it’s maybe the question i get almost, more than anything else. outside of defense. obamacare is a disaster. you know it, we all know it. it's going up at numbers that nobody’s ever seen, worldwide. it’s-nobody has ever seen numbers like this for health care. it's only getting worse. in 17, it implodes by itself. their method of fixing it is to go back and ask congress for more money. more, more money and we have right now almost $20 trillion in debt. obamacare will never work. it’s very bad, very bad health insurance, far too expensive, and not only expensive for the person that has it, unbelievably expensive for our country. it’s going to be one of the biggest line items very shortly. we have to repeal it and replace it with something absolutely much less expensive. and something that works, where your plan can actually be tailored. we have to get rid of the lines around the state, artificial lines, where we stop insurance companies from coming in and competing because they wanted president obama and whoever was working on it, they want to leave those lines because that gives the insurance companies, essentially monopolies. we want competition. you will have the finest health care plan there is. she wants to go to a single player plan which would be a disaster. somewhat similar to canada. if you ever noticed, the canadians, when they need a big operation, when something happens, they come into the united states in many cases. because their system is so slow, it's catastrophic in certain ways. but she wants to go to single payer, which means the government basically rules everything. hillary clinton has been after this for years. obamacare was the first step, obamacare is a total disaster and not only are your rates going up by numbers that nobody’s ever believed, but your deductibles are going up. so that unless you get hit by a truck, you will never be able to use it. it's a disastrous plan and it has to be repealed and replaced.i want to -- just one thing. hillary, everything is broken about it. everything. number two, bernie sanders said hillary clinton has very bad judgment. this is a perfect example of it. trying to save obamacare--you’re going to have plans.well, i’ll tell you what it means. you’re gonna have plans that are so good because we’re going to have so much competition in the insurance industry, once we break out the lines and allow the competition to come.excuse me. president obama by keeping those lines, the boundary lines around each state and it was almost done until just towards the end of the passage of obamacare. which by the way was a fraud. you know that. because jonathan grouper, the architect of obamacare was said, he said it was a great lie, it was a big lie. president obama said you keep your doctor, keep your plan. the whole thing was a fraud and it doesn't work. but when we get rid of those lines, you have competition and we will be able to keep preexisting, we’ll also be able to help people that can't get, don't have money because we are going to have people protected. and republicans feel this way. believe it or not, we’re going to block grant into the states we’re going to block grant into medicaid so we will be able to take care of people without the necessary funds to cake care of themselves.you are right about islamophobia and that's a shame. but one thing we have to do is, we have to make sure that, because there is a problem. i mean, whether we like it or not and we can be politically correct, but whether we like it or not, there is a problem. and we have to be sure that muslims come in and report when they see something going on. when they see hatred going on, they have to report it. as the example in san bernardino. many people saw the bombs all over the apartment of the two people that killed 14 and wounded many, many people. horribly wounded, they will never be the same. muslims have to report the problems when they see them. and, you know, there is always a reason for everything. if they don't do that, it's a very difficult situation for our country. because you look at orlando and you look at san bernardino and you look at the world trade center. go outside and you look at paris, look at that horrible thing. these are radical islamic terrorists and she won't even mention the word and nor will president obama. he won't use the term radical islamic terrorist, no. to solve a problem you have to be able to state what the problem is or at least, say the name. she won't say the name and president obama won't say the name. but the name is there. it's radical islamic terror. and before you solve it, you have to say the name.first of all, captain khan is an american hero and if i were president at that time he would be alive today because, unlike her who voted for the war without knowing what she was doing, i would not have had our people in iraq. iraq was a disaster. so he would have been alive today. the muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed into an extreme vetting from certain areas of the world. hillary clinton wants to allow --it is called extreme vetting. we are going to areas like syria where they are coming in by the tens of thousands because of barack obama and hillary clinton wants wants to allow a 550% increase over obama. people are coming into our country like we have no idea who they are, where they are from, what their feelings about our country is and she wants 550% more. this is going to be the great trojan horse of all time. we have enough problems in this country. i believe in building safe zone, i believe in having other people pay for them, as an example the [arabian] gulf states who are not carrying their weight but they have nothing but money and take care of people. but i don't want to have, with all the problems this country has and all of the problems you see going on, hundreds of thousands of people come in from syria where we know nothing about them. we know nothing about their values and we know nothing about their love for our country.it has not been debunked. i was against the war in iraq.it has not been debunked and you voted for it and shouldn't have.excuse me, she just went about 25 seconds over her time. can i respond?hillary clinton in terms of having people come into our country. we have many criminal illegal aliens. when we want to send them back to their country, their countryi think i should respond because, so ridiculous. look, now she is blaming -- she got caught in a total lie. her papers went out to all her friends at the banks, goldman sachs and everybody else. and she said things, wikileaks, that just came out. and she lied. now she’s blaming the lie on the late great abraham lincoln. that’s when-okay, honest abe never lied. that’s the good thing. that's the big difference between abraham lincoln and you. that's a big, big difference. we’re talking about some difference. but, as far as other elements of what you were saying, i don't know putin. i think it would be great if we got along with russia because we could fight isis together, as an example, but i don't know putin. but i notice, any time anything wrong happens, they like to say the russians, well she doesn't know if it's the russians doing the hacking. maybe there is no hacking, but there is - now russia - and the reason they blame russia is they think they’re trying to tarnish me with russia. i know nothing about russia - i know about russia, but i know nothing about the inner workings of russia. i don’t deal there, i have no businesses there, i have no loans from russia. i have a very very great balance sheet. so great that when i did the old post office, on pennsylvania avenue, the united states government because of my balance sheet, which they actually know very well, chose me to do the old post office between the white house and congress. they chose me to do the old post office - one of the primary things, in fact, perhaps the primary thing was balance sheet. but i have no loans with russia. you could go to the united states government and they would probably tell you that because they know my sheet very well in order to get that development, i had to have - now the taxes are a very simple thing. as soon as i have - first of all, i pay hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes. many of her friends took bigger deductions. warren buffett took a massive deduction, soros, who’s a friend of hers took a massive deduction. many of the people that are giving her all this money so that she can do many more commercials than me, gave her - took massive deductions. i pay hundreds of millions in taxes, but, but as soon as my routine audit is finished, i’ll release my returns. i’ll be very proud to.one thing i’d do is get rid of carried interest. the - one of the greatest provisions for people like me, to be honest with you, i give up a lot when i run because i knockout the tax code. and she could have done this years ago, by the way. she is - she was a united states senator. she complains that donald trump took advantage of the tax code. well, why didn't you change it, why didn’t you change it when you were a senator? the reason you didn’t is that all your friends take the same advantage that i do. and they do, you have provisions in the tax code, that frankly, we could change. but you wouldn't change it because all of these people gave you the money so you can take negative ads on donald trump. but, and i say that about a lot of things. i heard hillary complaining about so many different things over the years, i wish we would have done this. but she’s been there for 30 years, she’s been doing this stuff, she never changed, and she never will change. she never will change. we are getting rid of carried interest provisions. i’m lowering taxes, actually, because i think it's so important for corporations because we have corporations leaving, massive corporations, and little ones. the little ones can't form. we are getting rid of regulations, which goes hand in hand with the, lowering the taxes. but we’re bringing the tax rate down from 35% to 15%. we are cutting taxes for the middle class and i will tell you, we are cutting them big league for the middle class. and i’ll tell you, hillary clinton is raising your taxes, folks, she can look at me, she is raising your taxes, really high and what that's going to do is a disaster for the country. but she is raising the taxes and i'm lowering the taxes. that in itself is a big difference. we are going to be thriving again. we have no growth in this country. there is no growth. if china has a gdp of 7% it's like a national catastrophe. we’re down at 1%, and that's like no growth. and we are going lower, in my opinion. and a lot of that has to do with the fact that our taxes are so high. just about the highest in the world, and i'm bringing them down to one of the lower in the world. and i think it's so important. one of the most important things we can do. but she is raising everybody's taxes massively.of course i did. of course i did. and so do all of her donors, or most of her donors. i know many of her donors. her donors took massive tax write offs. a lot lot of my write off was depreciation and a lot of other things hillary clinton as a senator allowed and she always allowed because the people that give her all this money, they want it. that’s why. see, i understand the tax code better than anybody that’s ever run for president. hillary clinton is extremely complex. hillary clinton has friends that want all of these provisions, including, they want the carried interest provision, which is very important to wall street people, but they really want the carried interest provision, which i believe hillary is leaving, and it's very interesting why she is leaving carried interest. but i will tell, you that, number one, i pay tremendous numbers of taxes. i absolutely used it and so did warren buffett and so did george soros and so did many of the other people that hillary is getting money from. now, i won't mention their names because they are rich, but they’re not famous. so we won’t make them famous.no. but i pay tax and i pay federal tax too. but i have a write off, a lot of it is depreciation, which is a wonderful charge. i love depreciation. you know, she has given it to us. hey, if she had a problem, for 30 years she’s been doing this, anderson, i say it all the time, she talks about health care. why didn't you do something about it? she talks about taxes. why didn't she do something about it? she doesn't do anything about anything other than talk. with her, it's all talk and no action. and again, bernie sanders, it's really bad judgment. she has made bad judgment not only on taxes, she’s made bad judgements on libya, on syria, on iraq. her and obama whether you like it or not, the way they got out of iraq, the vacuum they left, that's why isis formed in the first place. they started from the little area and now they are in 32 different nations, hillary. congratulations. great job.why didn't you do it? why didn’t you do it?you could have done it. if you were an effective senator, you could have done it. but you were not an effective senator.but she said a lot of things that were false. i think we should --first of all, she was there as secretary of state with the so-called line in the sand.you were still in contact with the white house. and perhaps sadly, obama probably still listened to you. i don't think he would listen to you very much anymore. obama draws the line in the sand. it was laughed at all over the world what happened. now, with that being said, she talks tough against russia, but our nuclear program has fallen way behind and they have gone wild with their nuclear program. not good. our government shouldn’t have allowed that to happen. russia is new in terms of nuclear and we are old and tired and exhausted in terms of nuclear. a very bad thing. now, she talks tough. she talks really tough against putin and against assad. she talks in favor of the rebels. she doesn't even know who the rebels are. you know, every time we take rebels whether it's in iraq or anywhere else, we’re arming people. and you know what happens? they end up being worse than the people. look at what she did in libya with qaddafi. qaddafi is out. it's a mess. and by the way, isis has a good chunk of their oil. i'm sure you’ve probably have heard that. it was a disaster. the fact is almost everything she has done has been a mistake and it’s been a disaster. but if you look at russia, just take a look at russia and look at what they did this week, and i agree she wasn't there, but possibly she’s consulted. we sign a peace treaty and everyone’s all excited, but what russia did with assad and by the way with iran who you made very powerful with the dumbest deal perhaps i have seen in the history of making, with the $150 billion and with the $1.7 billion in cash, which is enough cash to fill up this room, but look at that deal. iran and russia are against us. so she wants to fight. she wants to fight for rebels. there’s one problem. you don’t even know who the rebels are. so what’s the purpose?i don't like assad at all, but assad is killing isis. russia is killing isis and iran is killing isis and they have lined up because of weak foreign policy.okay. he and i haven't spoken, and i disagree.i disagree. right now, syria is fighting isis. we have people that want to fight both at the same time. but syria is no longer syria. syria is russia and it’s iran who she made strong and kerry and obama made into a powerful nation and a rich nation, very quickly, very, very quickly. i believe we have to get isis. we have to worry about isis before we can get too much more involved. she had a chance to do something with syria, they had a chance, and that was the line.aleppo is a disaster, humanitarian wise.i think that it basically has fallen, okay? it basically has fallen. let me tell youi can't think of any.i can't think of any. i have 200 generals and admirals who endorsed me. i have 21 congressional medal of honor recipients who endorse me. we talk about it all the time. they understand. why can't they do something secretively where they go in and knock out the leadership. why would these people stay there? i’ve been reading there for weeks about mosul...that it’s the harbor between raqqa and mosul, this is why where they think the isis leaders are. why would they be staying...they are not staying there anymore. they are gone. because everybody is talking about how iraq which is us with our leadership goes into fight mosul. with the 200 admirals and generals, they can't believe it. general george patton and general douglas macarthur are spinning in their grave at the stupidity of what we are doing in the middle east.everything.you know that’s funny. she went over a minute over and you don't stop her. when i go one second over --it's very interesting.absolutely. i mean, she calls our people deplorable. a large group. and irredeemable. i will be a president for all of our people. and i’lll be a people that will turn our inner cities around and will give strength to people and will give economics to people and will bring jobs back. because nafta, signed by her husband, is perhaps the greatest disaster trade deal in the history of the world. not of this country. it stripped us of manufacturing jobs. we lost our jobs, we lost our money, we lost our plants. it is a disaster. and now she wants to sign tpp, even though she said now she’s for it. she called it the gold standard. and by the way, at the last debate she lied. because it turns out that she did say the gold standard, and said she didn't say it. they actually said that she lied. okay. and she lied. because it turned out she did say the gold standard and she said she didn’t say it. but she lied about a lot of things. i would be a president for all of the people. african-americans, the inner cities. devastating what's happening to our inner cities. she’s been talking about for years. as usual, she talks about it, nothing happens. she doesn't get it done. same with the latino americans. the hispanic americans. the same exact thing. they talk. theydon't get it done. you go into the inner cities, it's 45% poverty. african-americans now 45% poverty in the inner cities. the education is a disaster. jobs are essentially nonexistent. i mean, i’ve been saying in big speeches where i have 20 and 30,000 people. what do you have to lose? it can't get worse? she has been talking about the inner cities for 25 years. nothing is going to ever happen. let me tell you, if she is president of the united states, nothing’s going to happen. it's going to be talk. all of her friends, the taxes we are talking about. and i would just get it by osmosis. she is not doing me favors, but by doing all the others favors, she is doing me favors. but i will tell you the is all talk and it doesn't get done. all you have to do is take a look at her senate run, take a look at upstate new york.it turned out to be a disaster.we have a divided nation. we have a very divided nation. you look at charlotte, you look at baltimore, you look at the violence taking place in the inner cities. chicago. you look at washington, d.c. we have an increase in murder within our cities, the biggest in 45 years. we have a divided nation because of people like her. believe me, she has tremendous hate in her heart. when she said deplorables, she meant it. and when she said irredeemable, they’re irredeemable! you didn't mention that, but when she said they’re irredeemable, to me that might have been worse. she’s got tremendous hatred. and this country cannot take another four years of barack obama and that's what you are getting with her.no it wasn't check out a sex tape. it was take a look at this person she build up to be this wonderful, uh, girl scout, who was no girl scout.just so youi'm shocked to hear that.we have the slowest growth and our country is a disaster.justice scalia, great judge, died recently and we have a vacancy. i am looking to appoint judges very much in the mold of justice scalia. i am looking for judges and have actually picked 20 of them. so that people wouldsuch a great question because energy is under siege by the obama administration. under absolute siege. the epa, environmental protection agency, is killing these energy companies. and foreign companies are now coming in. buying so many of our different plants and then rejiggering the plant, so they take care of their oil. we are killing, absolutely killing our energy business in this country. now i am all for alternative forms of energywell, i consider her statement about my children to be a very nice compliment. i don't know if it was meant to be a compliment, but it is a great... i'm proud of my children. they have done a wonderful job and they have been wonderful, wonderful kids. so i consider that a compliment. i will say this about hillary. she doesn't quit and she doesn't give up. i respect that. i tell it like it is. she is a fighter. i disagree with much of what she is fighting for, i do disagree with her judgment in many cases, but she does fights hard and doesn't quit and she doesn’t give up, and i consider that a very good trait.well, first of all, it’s so great to be with you and thank you, everybody. the supreme court, it is what it is all about. our country is so, so, it is just so imperative that we have the right justices. something happened recently where justice ginsburg made some very inappropriate statements toward me and toward a tremendous number of people. many, many millions of people that i represent and she was forced to apologize. and apologize she did. but these were statements that should never, ever have been made. we need a supreme court that in my opinion is going to uphold the second amendment and all amendments, but the second amendment which is under absolute siege. i believe, if my opponent should win this race, which i truly don't think will happen, we will have a second amendment which will be a very, very small replica of what it is right now. but i feel that it is absolutely important that we uphold because of the fact that it is under such trauma. i feel that the justices that i am going to appoint, and i've named 20 of them. the justices that i am going to appoint will be pro-life. they will have a conservative bent. they will be protecting the second amendment. they are great scholars in all cases and they're people of tremendous respect. they will interpret the constitution the way the founders wanted it interpreted and i believe that’s very important. i don't think we should have justices appointed that decide what they want to hear. it is all about the constitution of, and it is so important. the constitution the way it was meant to be. and those are the people that i will appoint.well the d.c. versus heller decision was very strongly... and she was extremely angry about it. i watched. i mean, she was very, very angry when upheld. and justice scalia was so involved and it was a well crafted decision. but hillary was extremely upset. extremely angry. and people that believe in the second amendment and believe in it very strongly were very upset with what she had to say.well, let me just tell you before we go any further, in chicago, which has the toughest gun laws in the united states, probably you could say by far, they have more gun violence than any other city. so we have the toughest laws and you have tremendous gun violence. i am a very strong supporter of the second amendment. and i don't know if hillary was saying it in a sarcastic manner but i'm very proud to have the endorsement of the nra and it was the earliest endorsement they've ever given to anybody who ran for president. so i'm very honored by all of that. we are going to appoint justices, this is the best way to help the second amendment. we are going to appoint justices that will feel very strongly about the second amendment. that will not do damage to the second amendment.well, if that would happen, because i am pro-life and i will be appointing pro-life judges, i would think that would go back to the individual states.if they overturned it, it would go back to the states.if we put another two or perhaps three justices on, that is really what will happen. that will happen automatically in my opinion. because i am putting pro-life justices on the court. i will say this. it will go back to the states and the states will then make a determination.well i think it is terrible. if you go with what hillary is saying, in the ninth month you can take baby and rip the baby out of the womb of the mother just prior to the birth of the baby. now, you can say that that is okay and hillary can say that that is okay, but it's not okay with me. because based on what she is saying and based on where she's going and where she's been, you can take baby and rip the baby out of the womb. in the ninth month. on the final day. and that's not acceptable.and honestly, nobody has business doing what i just said. doing that as late as one or two or three or four days prior to birth. nobody has that.well first of all, she wants to give amnesty, which is a disaster. and very unfair to all of the people waiting in line for many, many years. we need strong borders. in the audience we have four mothers of - i mean, these are unbelievable people that i've gotten to know over a period of years whose children have been killed, brutally killed, by people that came into the country illegally. you have thousands of mothers and fathers and relatives all over the country. they're coming in illegally. drugs are pouring in through the border. we have no country if we have no border. hillary wants to give amnesty. she wants to have open borders. as you know, the border patrol agents, 16,500 plus i.c.e. last week endorsed me. first time they've endorsed a candidate. it means their job is tougher. but they know what’s going on. they know it better than anybody. they want strong borders. they feel we have to have strong borders. i was up in new hampshire the other day. the biggest complaint they have, it’s with all the problems going on in the world, many of the problems caused by hillary clinton and barack obama. all of the problems. the single biggest problem is heroin that pours across our southern borders. just pouring and destroying their youth it is poisoning the blood of their youth and plenty of other people. we have to have strong borders. we have to keep the drugs out of our country. right now, we're getting the drugs, they're getting the cash. we need strong borders. we need absolute, we cannot give amnesty. now, i want to build the wall. we need the wall. the border patrol, i.c.e., they all want the wall. we stop the drugs; we shore up the border. one of my first acts will be to get all of the drug lords, all of the bad ones, we have some bad, bad people in this country that have to go out. we're going to get them out. we're going to secure the border. and once the border is secured, at a later date, we'll make a determination as to the rest. but we have some bad hombres here and we're going to get them out.chris, i think it’s -- i think i should respond. first of all, i had a very good meeting with the president of mexico. very nice man. we will be doing very much better with mexico on trade deals. believe me. the nafta deal signed by her husband is one of the worst deals ever made of any kind signed by anybody. it’s a disaster. hillary clinton wanted the wall. hillary clinton fought for the wall in 2006 or there abouts. now, she never gets anything done, so naturally the wall wasn't built. but hillary clinton wanted the wall.we are a country of laws. by the way --and a wall.president obama has moved millions of people out. nobody knows about it. nobody talks about it. but under obama, millions of people have been moved out of this country. they've been deported. she doesn't want to say that, but that's what has happened and that’s what happened - big league. as far as moving these people out and moving, we either have a country or we don't. we're a country of laws. we either have a border or we don't. now, you can come back in and you can become a citizen. but it’s very unfair. we have millions of people that did it the right way. they're on line. they're waiting. we're going to speed up the process bigly, because it’s very inefficient. but they're on line and they’re waiting to become citizens. very unfair that somebody runs across the border, becomes a citizen. under her plan you have open borders. you would have a disaster on trade and and you will have a disaster with your open borders. what she doesn’t say is that president obama has deported millions and millions of people.thank you.that was a great pivot off the fact that she wants open borders. okay? how did we get on to putin?just to finish on the borders, she wants open borders. people are going to pour into our country. people are going to come in from syria. she wants 550% more people than barack obama. and he has thousands and thousands of people. they have no idea where they come from. and you see, we are going to stop radical islamic terrorism in this country. she won't even mention the words and neither will president obama. so i just want to tell you. she wants open borders. now we can talk about putin. i don't know putin. he said nice things about me. if we got along well, that would be good. if russia and the united states got along well and went after isis, that would be good. he has no respect for her. he has no respect for our president. and i'll tell you what. we're in very serious trouble. because we have a country with tremendous numbers of nuclear warheads, 1,800, by the way. where they expanded and we didn't. 1,800 nuclear warheads. and she is playing chicken. look.putin from everything i see has no respect for this person.no puppet. you're the puppet.she has no idea whether it is russia, china or anybody else.you have no idea.our country has no idea.yeah, i doubt it, i doubt it.she doesn't like putin because putin has outsmarted her at every step of the way.excuse me. putin has outsmarted her in syria, he’s outsmarted her every step of the way.by russia or anybody else.of course i condemn, of course i condemn - i don't know putin. i have no idea-i never met putin. this is not my best friend. but if the united states got along with russia, it wouldn't be so bad. let me tell you, putin has outsmarted her and obama at every single step of the way. whether it is syria. you name it. missiles. take a look at the start-up that they signed. the russians have said, according to many, many reports, i can't believe they allowed us to do this. they create warheads and we can't. the russians can't believe it. she has been outsmarted by putin and all you have to do is look at the middle east. they’ve taken over. we've spent $6 trillion. they've taken over the middle east. she has been outsmarted and outplayed worse than anybody i've ever seen in any government whatsoever.and she always will be.wrong.i have 200 generals and admirals, 21 endorsing me. 21 congressional medal of honor recipients. as far as japan and other countries, we are being ripped off by everybody in the world. we're defending other countries. we are spending a fortune doing it. they have the bargain of the century. all i said is we have to renegotiate these agreements. because our country cannot afford to defend saudi arabia, japan, germany, south korea, and many other places. we cannot continue to afford. she took that as saying nuclear weapons.look. she's been proven to be a liar on so many different ways. this is just another lie.there is no quote. you won't find a quote from me.and defend yourselves. and defend yourselves. i didn't say -- and defend yourself.well, first of all, before i start on my plan, her plan is going to raise taxes and even double your taxes. her tax plan is a disaster. and she can say all she wants about college tuition. and i'm a big proponent. we're going to do a lot of things for college tuition but the rest the public is going to be paying for it. we will have a massive, massive tax increase under hillary clinton's plan. but i would like to start off where we left. because when i said japan and germany and i'm not just singling them out. but south korea, these are very rich countries. saudi arabia. nothing but money. we protect saudi arabia. why aren't they paying? she immediately, when she heard this, i questioned it, and i questioned nato, why aren’t they nato questioned? why aren't they paying? because they weren’t paying. since i did this, this was a year ago. all of a sudden they're paying. and i've been given a lot of credit for it. all of a sudden, they're starting to pay up. they have to pay up. we're protecting people. they have to pay up. and i'm a big fan of nato but they have to pay up. she comes out and says “we love our allies. we think our allies are great.” well, it is awfully hard to get them to pay up when you have somebody saying we think how great they are. we have to tell japan in a very nice way, we have to tell germany, all of these countries, south korea. we have to say, you have to help us out. we have, during his regime, during president obama's regime, we've doubled our national debt. we're up to $20 trillion. so my plan, we’re going to negotiate trade deals. we’re going to have a lot of free trade. more free trade than we have right now. but we have horrible deals. our jobs are being taken out by the deal that her husband signed. nafta. one of the worst deals ever. the jobs are being sucked out of our economy. you look at the places i just left. you go to pennsylvania, you go to ohio, you go to florida, you go to any of them. you go to upstate new york. our jobs have fled to mexico and other places. we're bringing our jobs back. i'm going to renegotiate nafta. and if i can't make a great deal, then we're going to terminate nafta and we’re going to create new deals. we're going to have trade but we're going to terminate it. we're going on make a great trade deal. if we can't, we're going to go our separate way because it has been a disaster. we're going to cut taxes massively. we're going to cut business taxes massively. they're going to start hiring people we're going to bring the $2.5 trillion that’s offshore back into the country. we are going to start the engine rolling again because right now, our country is dying. at 1% gdp.you can't.correct.over a 10-year period.so i just left some high representatives of india. they're growing at 8%. china is growing at 7%. and that for them is a catastrophically low number. we are growing our last report came out, and it is right around the 1% level. and i think it’s going down. last week as you know, the end of last week, they came out with an anemic jobs report. a terrible jobs report. in fact, i said is that the last jobs report before the election? because if it is, i should win easily because it was so bad. the report was so bad. look, our country is stagnant. we've lost our jobs, we've lost our businesses. we're not making things anymore, relatively speaking. our product is pouring in from china, pouring in from vietnam, pouring in from all over the world. i've visited so many communities. this has been such an incredible education for me, chris. i've gotten to know so many, i’ve developed so many friends over the last year. and they cry when they see what has happened. i pass factories that were thriving, 20, 25 years ago and because of the bill her husband signed and that she blessed 100%. it is just horrible what has happened to these people in these communities. now, she can say her husband did well but boy, did they suffer as nafta kicked in because it didn't really kick in very much. but it kicked in after they left. boy, did they suffer. that was one of the worst things that has ever been signed by our country. now she wants to sign trans-pacific partnership. and she wants it. she lied when she said she didn't call it the gold standard in one of the debates. she totally lied. she did call it the gold standard. and they actually fact checked and they said i was right.and that will be as bad as nafta.can i ask a simple question? she's been doing this for 30 years. why the hell didn't you do it over the last 15, 20 years? you were very much involved.excuse me. my turn. you were very much involved in every aspect of this country. very much. and you do have experience. i say the one thing you have over me is experience. but it is bad experience because what you've done has turned out badly. for 30 years you've been in a position to help. and if you say that i used steel or i used something else, i- make it impossible for me to do. i wouldn't mind. the problem is, you talk but you don't get anything done, hillary. you don't. just like when you ran the state department, $6 billion was missing. how do you miss $6 billion? you ran the state department. $6 billion was either stolen, they don't know. it’s gone. $6 billion. if you become president, this country is going to be in some mess. believe me.give me a break.well i think i did a much better job. i built a massive company, a great company, some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world worth many, many billions of dollars. i started with a $1 million loan. i agree with that. it's a $1 million loan, but i built a phenomenal company. and if we could run our country the way i've run my company, we would have a country that would you would be so proud of, you would even be proud of it. and frankly, when you look at her real record, take a look at syria, take a look at the migration, take a look at libya, take a look at iraq. she gave us isis because her and obama created this huge vacuum, and a small group came out of that huge vacuum because, we should have never been in iraq, but once we were there, we should have never got out the way they wanted to get out. she gave us isis as sure as you are sitting there. and what happened is now isis is in 32 countries. now i listen to how she's going to get rid of isis. she's going to get to rid of nobody.well, first of all, those stories have been largely debunked. those people, i don't know those people. i have a feeling how they came. i believe it was her campaign that did it just like if you look at what came out today on the clips where i was wondering what happened with my rally in chicago and other rallies where we had such violence. she's the one and obama that caused the violence. they hired people. they paid them $1500, and they're on tape saying be violent, cause fights, do bad things. i would say the only way -- because those stories are all totally false. i have to say that, and i didn't even apologize to my wife who is sitting right here because i didn't do anything. i didn't know any of these women. i didn't see these women. these women, the woman on the plane, the woman on the - i think they want either fame or her campaign did it. and i think it's her campaign because what i saw what they did, which is a criminal act, by the way, where they're telling people to go out and start fistfights and start violence -- and i'll tell you what. in particular, in chicago, people were hurt and people could have killed in that riot. and that's now all on tape started by her. i believe, chris, she got these people to step forward. if it wasn't, they get their ten minutes of fame, but they were all totally -- it was all fiction. it was lies and it was fiction.i did not say that.i did not say that.i did not say that.nobody has more respect for women than i do. nobody. (laughter)and frankly, those stories have been largely debunked. and i really want to just talk about something slightly different. she mentions this, which is all fiction, all fictionalized, probably or possibly started by her and her very sleazy campaign. but i will tell you what isn't fictionalized are her e-mails where she destroyed 33,000 e-mails criminally, criminally after getting a subpoena from the united states congress. what happened to the fbi, i don't know. we have a great general, four-star general, today you read it in all the papers going to potentially serve five years in jail for lying to the fbi, one lie. she's lied hundreds of times to the people, to congress, and to the fbi. he's going to probably go to jail. this is a four-star general, and she gets away with it and she can run for the presidency of the united states? that's really what you should be talking about, not fiction where somebody wants fame or where they come out of her crooked campaign.wrong.so sad when she talks about violence at my rallies and she caused the violence. it's on tape. the other things are false, but honestly i'd love to talk about getting rid of isis and i'd love to talk about other things.but those other charges, as she knows, are false.and it's a criminal enterprise --it's a criminal enterprise. saudi arabia given $25 million, qatar, all of these countries. you talk about women and women's rights? so these are people that push gays off business, off buildings. these are people that kill women and treat women horribly and yet you take their money. so i'd like to ask you right now why don't you give back the money that you've taken from certain countries that treat certain groups of people so horribly? why don’t you give back the money? i think it would be a great gesture because she takes a tremendous amount of money. and you take a look at the people of haiti. i was in little haiti the other day in florida, and i want to tell you they hate the clintons because what's happened in haiti with the clinton foundation is a disgrace. and you know it and they know it and everybody knows it.i don't want you to help them anymore. i'd like to mention one thing. trump foundation, small foundation. people contribute. i contribute. the money goes, 100%, 100% goes to different charities, including a lot of military. i don’t get anything. i don't buy boats. i don't buy planes.no, we put up the american flag and that's it. they put up the american flag. we fought for the right in palm beach to put up the american flag.there was, there was and by the way, the money went to fisher house where they build houses, the money that you're talking about went to fisher house where they build houses for veterans and disabled veterans.we're entitled because of the laws that people like her pass to take massive amounts of depreciation on other charges and we do it. and all of her donors, just about all of them. i know buffett took hundreds of millions of dollars. soros, george soros took hundreds of millions of dollars.--let me just explain. all of her donors. most of her donors --have done the same thing as i did. and you know what she should have done? you know hillary, what you should have done? you should have changed the law when you were a united states senator if you don't like it ---- because your donors and special interests are doing the same thing as i do except even more so. you should have changed the law, but you won't change the law because you take in so much money. i sat in my apartment today on a very beautiful hotel down the street.i will tell you i sat there. i sat there watching ad after ad after ad, all false ads, all paid for by your friends on wall street that gave so much money because they know you're going to protect them. and frankly, you should have changed the laws. if you don't like what i did, you should have changed the laws.i will look at it at the time. i’m not looking at anything now, i'll look at it at the time. what i've seen, what i’ve seen, is so bad. first of all, the media is so dishonest and so corrupt and the pile on is so amazing. "the new york times" actually wrote an article about it, but they don't even care. it is so dishonest, and they have poisoned the minds of the voters. but unfortunately for them, i think the voters are seeing through it. i think they’re going to see through it, we’ll find out on november 8th, but i think they’re going to see through it. if you look --excuse me, chris. if you look at your voter rolls, you will see millions of people that are registered to vote. millions. this isn't coming from me. this is coming from pew report and other places. millions of people that are registered to vote that shouldn't be registered to vote. so let me just give you one other thing. i talk about the corrupt media. i talk about the millions of people. i'll tell you one other thing. she shouldn't be allowed to run. it’s -- she's guilty of a very, very serious crime. she should not be allowed to run, and just in that respect i say it's rigged because she should never --chris. she should never have been allowed to run for the presidency based on what she did with e-mails and so many other things.what i’m saying is that i will tell you at the time. i'll keep you in suspense, okay?should have gotten it. (laughter)i think what the fbi did and what the department of justice did, including meeting with her husband, the attorney general, in the back of an airplane on the tarmac in arizona, i think it's disgraceful. i think it's a disgrace.i think we've never had a situation so bad (applause)let me tell you, mosul is so sad. we had mosul. but when she left, she took everybody out, we lost mosul. now we're fighting again to get mosul. the problem with mosul and what they wanted to do is they wanted to get the leaders of isis who they felt were in mosul. about three months ago, i started reading they want to get the leaders and they're going to attack mosul. whatever happened to the element of surprise, okay? we announce we're going after mosul. i've been reading about going after mosul now for about how long is it, hillary, three months? these people have all left. they've all left. the element of surprise. douglas macarthur, george patton spinning in their graves at the stupidity of our country. so we’re now fighting for mosul. that we had. all she had to do was stay there, now we’re going in to get it. but you know who the big winner in mosul is going to be after we eventually get it -- and the only reason they did it is because she's running for office of president and they want to look tough. they want to look good. he violated the red line in the sand, and he made so many mistakes. he made all mistakes. that's why we have the great migration, but she wanted to look good for the election. so they’re going in. but who is going to get mosul really? we'll take mosul eventually. by the way, if you look at what's happening, much tougher than they thought. much, much tougher. much more dangerous, going to be more deaths than they thought. but the leaders that we wanted to get are all gone because they're smart. they say what do we need this for. so mosul is going to be a wonderful thing, and iran should write us a letter of thank you. just like the really stupid, the stupidest deal of all time, a deal that's going to give iran absolutely nuclear weapons. iran should write us yet another letter saying thank you very much because iran, as i said many years ago, iran is taking over iraq. something they've wanted to do forever, but we've made it so easy for them. so we're now going to take mosul and you know who is going to be the beneficiary? iran. boy are they making, they are outsmarting… look you're not there. you might be involved in that decision, but you were there when you took everybody out of mosul and out of iraq. you shouldn't have been in iraq, but you did vote for it. you shouldn't have been in iraq, but once you were in iraq, you should have never left the way -- the point is the big winner is going to be iran.wrong.wrong.wrong.we don't gain anything. iran is taking over --iran is taking over iraq.we would have gained --no, you're the one that's unfit. you know, wikileaks just actually came out. john podesta said some horrible things about you, and boy was he right. he said some beauties. and you know bernie sanders, he said you have bad judgment. you do. and if you think going into mosul after we let the world know we're going in and all of the people we really wanted, the leaders are all gone, if you think that was good, then you do. now john podesta said you have terrible instincts. bernie sanders said you have bad judgment. i agree with both.which is a big mistakeit's a catastrophe.it’s a mess. have you seen it? have you seen it? have you seen what’s happened to aleppo?okay, so it hasn’t fallen.take a look at it.that’s right. and they are being slaughtered because of bad decisions.well aleppo is a disaster. it’s a humanitarian nightmare, but it has fallen from any standpoint. what do you need, a signed document? take a look at aleppo. it is so sad when you see what's happened. and a lot of this is because of hillary clinton. because what's happened is by fighting assad, who turned out to be a lot tougher than she thought -- now she's going to say oh he loves assad. he's much tougher and much smarter than her and obama. and everyone thought he was gone two years ago, three years ago. he aligned with russia. he now also aligned with iran, who we made very powerful. we gave them $150 billion back. we gave them $1.7 billion in cash. i mean, cash, bundles of cash as big as this stage. we gave them $1.7 billion. now they have lined -- he has aligned with russia and with iran. they don't want isis, but they have other things because we're backing, we're backing rebels. we don't know who the rebels are. we're giving them lots of money, lots of everything. we don't know who the rebels are, and when and if -- and it's not going to happen because you have russia and you have iran now. but if they ever did overthrow assad, you might end up with as bad as assad is. and he’s a bad guy. but you may very well end up with worse than assad. if she did nothing, we would be in much better shape. and this is what's caused the great migration where she's taking in tens of thousands of syrian refugees, who probably in many cases -- not probably, who are definitely in many cases, isis-aligned. and we now have them in our country. wait til you see -- this is going to be the great trojan horse. wait til you see what happens in the coming years. lots of luck, hillary. thanks a lot for doing a great job.but i just have too... it’s so ridiculous what she… she will defeat isis. we should never have let isis happen in the first place. and right now they are in 32 countries --wait one second. they had a cease-fire three weeks ago. awell i saw they're wrong because i’m going to create tremendous jobs. and we're bringing gdp from really 1%, which is what it is now, and if she got in, it would be less than zero, but we’re bringing it from 1% up to 4%, and i actually think we can go higher than 4%. i think you can go to 5% or 6%. and if we do, you don’t have to bother asking your question. because we have a tremendous machine. we will have created a tremendous economic machine once again. to do that, we're taking back jobs. we're not going to let our companies be raided by other countries where we lose all our jobs. we don't make our product anymore. it's very sad, but i am going to create a… the kind of a country that we were from the standpoint of industry. we used to be there. we've given it up. we've become very, very sloppy. we've had people that are political hacks making the biggest deals in the world. bigger than companies. you take these big companies. these trade deals are far bigger than these companies, and yet we don't use our great leaders, many of whom back me and many of whom backed hillary, i must say, but we don't use those people. those are the people...these are the greatest negotiators in the world. we have the greatest business people in the world. we have to use them to negotiate our trade deals. we use political hacks. we use people that get the position because they made a campaign contribution, and they're dealing with china and people that are very much smarter than they are, so we have to use our great people. but that being said, we will create an economic machine the likes of which we haven't seen in many decades and people, chris, will again go back to work, and they'll make a lot of money, and we'll have companies that will will grow and expand and start from new.we've heard this before, hillary. we've heard this before.thank you, hillary. could i just respond?because i disagreed with ronald reagan very strongly on trade. i disagreed with him. we should have been much tougher on trade even then. i've been waiting for years. nobody does it right. and frankly now we're going to do it right.i'm cutting taxes. we're going to grow the economy. it's going to grow in a record rate.it is going to totally help you. and one thing we have to do is repeal and replace the disaster known as obamacare. it's destroying our country. it's destroying our businesses, our small business and our big businesses. we have to repeal and replace obamacare. you take a look at the kind of numbers that that will cost us in the year [2017]. it is a disaster if we don't repeal and replace. it is probably going to die of its own weight, but obamacare has to go. the premiums are going up 60%, 70%, 80%. next year, they're going to go up over 100%. and i’m really glad that the premiums have started, at least the people see what's happening because she wants to keep obamacare and she wants to make it even worse and it can't get any worse. bad health care at the most expensive price. we have to repeal and replace obamacare.such a nasty woman.your husband disagrees with you.she's raising the money from the people she wants to control. doesn't work that way. but when i started this campaign, i started it very strongly. it's called make america great again. we're going to make america great. we have a depleted military. it has to be helped. it has to be fixed. we have the greatest people on earth in our military. we don't take care of our veterans. we take care of illegal immigrants, people that come into our country illegally better than we take care of our vets. that can’t happen. our policemen and women are disrespected. we need law and order, but we need justice too. our inner cities are a disaster. you get shot walking to the store. they have no education. they have no jobs. i will do more for african-americans and latinos that she can do for ten lifetimes. all she's done is talk to the african-americans and to the latinos, but they get the vote and then they come back, they say ‘we’ll see you in four years.’ we are going to make america strong again and we are going to make america great again and it has to start now. we cannot take four more years of barack obama, and that's what you get when you get her.